ERA V5 Session - 2026/07/04 06:34 IST - Transcript
Transcript
The Admin: week we move on from the basics and actually target one of the most important topics that is there which determines literally everything. When I say everything, this is going to define how much compute we are going to spend, how much our user users are going to spend, what is the quality of a model that is trained, how sovereign it is, how much it knows about a particular culture of people. what is the size of the model and literally everything that falls on this is a single decision that essentially determines every single thing we do about the model architecture.
The Admin: In earlier courses this topic was literally maybe half an hour and not even half an hour much less than that vocabulary design we never discussed it was just a capstone project but as I shared earlier this course now is structured in such a way that the whole capstone is the project this is the most important thing that we need to discuss we need to agree on and you also need to build your intuition on because if you do decide to make or your own LLMs in future with some companies or with your partners then this is one area where you'll need to focus on. So today we're going to cover the tokenization and the o tokenization as we discussed in the last session is how do we treat the words that we have and vocabulary design is how many of them we have and what all should be included there.
The Admin: So the text u I hope that you do read it because there's a lot that sometimes I miss when I'm speaking which is a part of it but there's a lot to understand in today's session which is actually very well covered in text also. So we're also going to touch upon two papers that we released in last era before. One is on Brahmik tokenizer which is actually a tokenizer and the other is chroner embedding which we just going to do a passing discussion today but in future we have a discussion on that also what is it and why that was also important. the question that we have is how do we look at text and how do we send it to the model.
The Admin: We discussed in the last session that a transformer is going to take one token at once and predict the next one right so it has to go through step by step which means we have multiple options of playing with it. we can send text as a character. For example, we can send T space then L then E. So in that way we have very few alphabets to take care of. We can collect all the alphabets of all the languages and then we probably have around maybe thousand or 2,000 of them.
The Admin: Chinese if you add maybe 4,000 there are lot many characters there glyphs there but if you cover just that then we can make any word of our choice whenever we want but the problem there is just for this sentence itself our transform will have to work 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 you can see maybe somewhere around 25 30 times that is expensive so then the other option that we have is that we work with the words directly, So if you do the words part which is what comes to our mind first there's going to be one then we can decide to have a space or not have a space. this is also going to be discussed today. Some algorithms decide that the space is a separate entity.
The Admin: some algorithm decide that space including dilemma is an entity right space in and before is an entity not before may also be there but idea is that space and the word is entity because if you think about how English language is structured or other languages also we have space nearly before every word so why don't we make a part of it we just have addendum do it we do not have to generate space also right so these are PhD people working in the way that they think so we can do that so if we do that then the dilemma before the algorithm So 1 2 3 4 five five tokens and we good.
The Admin: The problem is your thumb right when you don't type well and you make spelling mistakes and there are different spellings also then we keep on making words we keep making acronyms we keep on inventing new words by mixing two other words and there are just too many words if you think about it if we were to cover all the languages all the acronyms all the chemical symbols in fact chemical is a good example. So we have C2H6 ethane and so on and so on. So we need to somehow convert all of them. So if you start converting words into a token then our vocabulary is going to be huge. Why is that a problem? We'll discuss that. But that is one option we have right. So before we even discuss algorithm because there are two three of them that we need to cover.
The Admin: We want to understand what is the problem that we're solving and this actually is the problem that how many times we like to run a transformer right now here is one example the color of the sky is blue and you can see that we have made a mistake here by writing the spelling of color wrong. if we had a tokenizer which looks at a text at the character level that is what tokenizer is. It is tokenizing something that we can feed to a neural network. So if we use a tokenizer that looks at text at a character level then we'll have t h e then space then colors everything is good we can to tokenize the whole damn thing right and we have 30 tokens here not bad but if you had a word level because that is another option we have if you had a word level then we have t and then we have this u and k is anyone of you aware of what is this u and k you can just chart it out
00:05:00
Tauseef Ur Rahman: Is that a space?
Sachin Bharadwaj: I'm not
Tejas: the token alone to the tokenizer.
The Admin: Yes, unk is unknown.
The Admin: So the problem and we have these unknown tokenizer otherwise also and we'll discuss later on why it is required but short hint is when a tokenizer for example unk when it goes inside the model first of all we have to represent color in some way right so here we're going to represent it in a unk token so whatever word is not the part of our vocabulary a new word that comes in and we still want to send to a new network we just say it's unk we don't know about
The Admin: So if you had two spelling mistakes there is no way it can figure out for one color okay U and K I can assign to color but what is the spelling of blue or B L EU someone wrote like that right so we have two U and K exactly same tokens representing two different wrong spellings won't work but sticking to this example unk is used for color because it's not part of the vocabulary we never added that to the Oxford dictionary and Oxford dictionary is what we let's say copying right so the problem is that even though we have eight tokens which is good because way less than 30 we have lost one word right there's no way we can represent a wrong spelling. So the third solution that is there which is what is used and every other algorithm based on it is called a subword. Why don't we come up with a solution where most of the words are there but a lot of times we are going to focus on the subword of a word.
The Admin: We'll discuss what is subword sub word like t i o n iing g re so replan rephrase reook right so that re comes a lot of times and if it comes before some other word it becomes a new word so those kind of sub words we play around that then the comes very often so it's going to be part of our vocabulary color also part of our vocabulary this are character all the characters also there we treat it separately right so if you compare the word level
The Admin: With the subword level you're going to see that we have the color and then r separately of the sky is blue. That's a nine subword is the only solution to the problem of tokenizing everything that we want even unknown because here color is Let's say you come up with a very weird spelling of color for k o l o u r for some reason. If we do not have a word which we won't because there's a new spelling I just invented we can go back to character level. It will increase the total number of tokens that we need because I need to now use space then L but I can still encode So subword is a combination of word and character mixed together. How do we make it What is the part of this data set that allows us to make it is even more important. Right? That's color. let's look at a rare word here. We bioluminence is something that is there in the vocabulary.
The Admin: You've heard of it. But another call that we have to make is how big our vocabulary is, Because here we have a neural network. It's not that we can change the words that it is trained later on. This is the first thing we have to discuss even before we start training a model. That's why this is session two, right? We have to decide what are the words our network will And you'll think that it sounds like a very weird question. What are the words that a new network is going to know is everything because if we do not have a word that talks about exoskeleton, if you do not have a word that talks about let's say quantum mechanics or let's say sadhant or manusmi and any other word that you can think of in your own language. It's going to be really hard for the model to even learn about that concept. This is something we have discuss. We also have to discuss what languages to Are you going to support polish?
The Admin: Are you going to support let's say Japanese? Of course, you might think What about different dialects in China? Right? Indians is fine, but what about all of those? You have to take a call even before you start training a model. taking call that I want to train on let's say Russian doesn't mean that you don't have to collect the Russian data then moment you take a call that you are committed and you have to collect a data set also right so coming back to bionsense because we will discuss all what I just said now here we decided that our vocabulary level is going to be let's say 100,000 right 100,000 is a big number 100,000 is one lakh spending one lakh is a good phone used to be a good phone so it's a
00:10:00
The Admin: big number but even in one lakh he will not get a word bioluminous because of the way we collect the most important words and remember that we're talking about multiple languages also right now even if you have no spelling mistake a word will still fail it will still come back and say unk I don't know what that word is and the unk was mislead I'm mesmerizing so we still have five tokens here fail less than 36 because character we have to predict every single alphabet one after the other but
The Admin: here biom is not a part you can contest that okay my vocabulary is big I am shashi tarur if I'm shashi turu I can write oxford five times and with the words that oxford doesn't have right so you can say that the problem is you can still come up with words that even shash won't know in bio science or in quantum physics those are the words that keep coming in so impossible to create a dictionary that keeps on expanding moment you add one more token
The Admin: The neural network has to be trained again. it cannot add token after the model is done. It's fixed. Unlike humans which can learn more words and more meanings, a neural network cannot. So we'll come back to this word level we are again again stuck. Look at what happens in bio in subword. We may not have bioluminescence but we will have biology right is one word in biography and it's used a lot of time. So we have figured out that ord. Then Lumen is used for light. It's in other word formations also. Then we have Essence it's f a word and then used in other cases also. You can see that bioluminescence got broken down into bioluminescence right and Even mesmerizing was broken down right and that will depend on the algorithm. We may have the mesmerizing as a word. Do we have it? Depends on how big the vocabulary is. And there's a cost to it and there's a benefit to it. That is also something we need to discuss.
The Admin: So here we seeing that we have eight tokens when we use subwords and all these are made up examples by the way a real tokenizer might behave separately differently but it's very close to how real tokenizer will also behave. let's talk about morphology is how the substructures are linked to each other. here if you see one word can contain unhelpfulness again character no problem. You can encode everything in character, but I don't want to run my new network 35 times, right? And it is expensive. When you keep hearing that a new network has a 1 million context or 100,000 context, that number is what people are talking about. How many tokens the new network can keep on predicting without acting like goldfish or start forgetting or performance drops, right? It's not that a model cannot predict one billion word.
The Admin: It can but it will start speaking gibberish because the architecture just cannot handle so many words. So whenever I keep hearing context or the output token context or input token total limit that limit is till what number of tokens the model behaving okay right and it's okay it's not perfect. So when you use fable of 4.8 date of 4.7 opus it's going to be really good initially right the context may be 1 million but it's really really good initially but after that is keep on fading and by the time you're hitting 100,000 let's say 1 million it is going to work like Friday 7 p.m.
The Admin: a person you are just exhausted and he needs to now go from Hebal to his home in Indranagar and has to cross that Hebal fly that is how the good the model is going to be by the time you have exhausted at limit but coming back here you can again see character level 35 no not going to happen word level again a problem unhelpfulness is such a word I don't know if you have ever used that word you may have heard of it but I don't know if you have ever heard of it sorry if you have ever used it in some word I can see what happens
The Admin: unhelpfulness right again we are able to break it down and make something new there's morphology like how do we break down words and make me of it let's talk about Hindi I don't know how many of you can read the cat sat on the mat right Hindi version so the cat sat on the mat or now character level again no problem we can convert everything but I want you to notice these things do you see the circle circle and this circle and this circle, right? We'll come back to it. There's a meaning to it. you may think that the Okay, look at this guy la and la it's not there in any other languages.
00:15:00
The Admin: All Indian languages have some other German and other languages also which are Hindu European and other stuff but this concept is not there in other languages right when I say others like English and derived from the Latin ones right now look at how it is represented in text it's very important because if you say I made an indic tokenizer and we are good for India and sovereign and bahhat and all of that then you need to know this look at this we have bar here and
The Admin: Then we have this thing again that circle coming in it's called halen. Then we have la and then we have this guy. What do you think that guy is doing? Anyone is aware of what is that thing? A dotted circle with a no.
Udit Singhania: That is for right? Half and No.
The Admin: So this concept is again only in the Indian languages. correct.
Ritambhra Korpal: So this is called halen and makes the alphabets half.
The Admin: not half it does half exactly exactly and…
Ritambhra Korpal: It removes the wobble from it to Yeah.
The Admin: this concept is very indic okay you are aware of it because you're here but you just assume so common that I don't need to even remember about it so we have a b e f right everything and similarly in hindi we have ka gaga and when I say ka I've already using as a matra in it so to remove that and just say I have to use this thing so when you're saying
The Admin: that means this thing but when you say you're not using a vow part of it then you have to mention this and that is how it is represented in the asai and in other UTF if you don't know what UTF is we'll come to it but that is how it is represented in computers we have to specifically tell the computer hey dude this is half LA and to say half we have to use two tokens we have to say and then no not remove the vow from it that is how it's represented and if you're not
The Admin: aware of it then we may break the word where this last thing was there and that la will just be la stuck because now when it gets attached to a new sub word where this is not taken care of if you don't take care of it it's going to attach to someone with the matra in it and it's going to become difficult and languages are very weird when we change the spelling right but let's see what happens here character level no problem 27 tokens perfect word level we did not cover Hindi at all and even if we
The Admin: our data set was such that these words were never seen or possible va and the may not be there but let's say we did not go Hindi in that case you're going to see that it becomes a big problem but sub subword level the benefit is that you can have a small set of subword level which can represent a lot of words and that allows us to actually add indic also right that's the magical part in 131,000 tokens it's a big number you can actually fill it with just English and not have any of Hindi
The Admin: But you can come up with a tokenizer that does really well on all the Indian languages and really good in English also in fact beating English at some level. Right? So that's the design of tokenizer and that's where we are going to be wanting our tokenizer to be because if it can represent languages properly then it can learn properly. It has a big effect on computation and the accuracy of the model that is going to be coming after this particular part. But it is very very important that you understand what tokenizer is. Okay, I'm going to pause here. and see if you have any questions just on the tokenizer and nothing else your assignment your quiz blah blah blah your suffering in your life because of the traffic all that discussion later on so any question on do you have on the tokenizer part
Sachin Bharadwaj: Yeah, Rohan, if you change the tokenizer and…
The Admin: Yeah, it's enough to change tokenizer after pretending an LM.
Sachin Bharadwaj: you already have a pretend LLM, so let's say I want…
The Admin: The tokenizer is the part of the LM trains on a tokenizer, right? So, impossible. You have to train it again.
Sachin Bharadwaj: if I make additions of few tokens in the tokenizer, why I still need to Thank you.
The Admin: Not fine, you have to train it again. Fine tuning maybe you can say that 2C is fine. But when you say I'm going to add thousand, you have to retrain it.
Sachin Bharadwaj: And return means you will train last few layers or…
Sachin Bharadwaj: all entire laptop.
The Admin: The entire thing.
The Admin: The entire thing with please.
Sachin Bharadwaj: Sorry entire. Okay. Thanks.
Avnish Midha: And Rowan is a great organizer for each language or…
The Admin: Yeah. Please raise your hand with yeah that is coming up.
Avnish Midha: is it come back?
Vedapragna: So…
Vedapragna: how is it able to identify the word at a subword level but not at a word level? What is the difference here? Okay.
The Admin: That is coming up.
The Admin: We'll discuss that. so yes.
sonu agarwal: Yeah, when I had the similar question because word is a complete matching it's doing but even server word is doing what level of matching so it's able
00:20:00
The Admin: So even before let me first hide this. So some UI updates. if you click this you get slightly cleaner view and there's the heights basically and this is default state what are we discussing today the dilemma of the algorithm we just discussed that why tokenize a load bearing which means that why deciding a tokenizer has cost effects by pairing quoting the algorithm that actually does the the breakage of the words that is coming up the family of algorithms what all algorithms are there are three of them we need to look at then we have vocabulary size is going to affect the overall
The Admin: all model weights also then we have a token ID converting into embedding a very short note on it because we have a embedding session later on in index script deep down then we have assignment discussion and a minor topic so that is what is coming up right so this answers what you cannot ask me right now It's a hypothetical claim from a company.
suresh kumar: Ron you briefly mentioned about it tells about till what number of to output tokens. can you elaborate a little bit on what the number of output tokens is it based on the input of the number of tokens and what's the relationship?
The Admin: That's all.
suresh kumar: Okay. It just a claim thing. This is the number of input tokens we can process and this is the number of output tokens we can give at any given type point.
The Admin: Yes, it is.
The Admin: Yes, it is based on some benchmarks that there are some heel and stack kind of problem that when you are at the 1 million level how much are you forgetting initially so there's a standard for that if that standard is maintained then we say we support 1 million context length all of the tokens unfortunately are simultaneously exited…
suresh kumar: And are all these tokens simultaneous output or is there a time domain for that? Okay, got it.
The Admin: but we have some technologies like KB cache and things similar that we'll discuss in future that allows us to not repeat a lot of calculations but when you're saying that I'm predicting 900,000 token that means you are predicting 900,000 tokens not 900,000
suresh kumar: Thank you.
The Admin: Okay, no all languages are decided up front and…
Avnish Midha: Yeah. I was asking does a model for example chat GBT right does it have one tokenizer per language or and it decides based on what language the question is asked also.
The Admin: we design one tokenizer.
Avnish Midha: Got it.
The Admin: Okay. TJ Kumar.
Tejaskumar Reddy J: Yeah. So here we have different tokenizer like character level, word level and sub word level, right? But there are often certain sets of words…
The Admin: Yeah. Yeah.
Tejaskumar Reddy J: which occur to occur together almost most of the time. So is there some kind of a logic where those words can be grouped and represented as a single token?
The Admin: I just took you through a TOC. So that's the next topic.
Tejaskumar Reddy J: Okay, great.
The Admin: Abishek.
abhishek Kumar: Yeah, Rohan. So the model still needs to train on different languages in order to understand that language, right? Okay. Okay.
The Admin: That's correct. So just having sub tokens in tokenizer doesn't make it a Hindi l we have to still train it on correct okay sa
Siva Ajjapu: Hi. so this model is a cost effective. I know that the limitation. So actually I want to understand that if we try in every alphabet or everything from a long ways in a character level.
Siva Ajjapu: So is it like we can able to get it in a word level or subword level without lost …
The Admin: I not understand your question at all.
Siva Ajjapu: if we token all the characters at once from if I say alphabets A B C D E like a A to G.
The Admin: Then the problem is just to predict the bioluminesence was mesmerizing I have to run the transformer 36 times cost is a problem and…
Siva Ajjapu: Yeah. So is it like …
The Admin: as I said as we keep on predicting the model gets tired and starts forgetting so it will become very bad very soon both cost training and…
Siva Ajjapu: okay. Yeah. Thank you.
The Admin: bad
The Admin: I don't every time.
Arun Aravind: So in tokenization every time this character level, word level and subword level will happen.
00:25:00
The Admin: What do you mean? we decided once that we are going character level, word level or subord level.
Arun Aravind: We decided at the beginning that we will take it at these that is what you said one of these three. Okay.
The Admin: One of these three level. And a good point to actually discuss that then why do we and just not say subword level not even talk about character level. Now there are situations where you may want character level and that is going to be for example In case of DNA you have a particular structure. So each let's say CGT and so on you may just want to be there right so you can come up with a problem which just requires characters or word level also when your words are fixed and no the word can ever come in.
The Admin: In that case word level makes complete sense and BP and the algorithm we are going to use to find a sub word levels u BP will converge to word level if there are no ways to come up more with more words. So the words are fixed you will have word level that's…
The Admin: why all three are supposed to be known by you but for the kind of languages we use and the words we come up with and the spelling mistakes we do so word level makes best for sense for us.
Arun Aravind: Just to reiterate it will be fixed at the beginning.
Arun Aravind: So one of the strategies we will fix and…
The Admin: Yeah, we will always pick sub word level for languages. Okay.
Arun Aravind: then Okay.
nagapavankumar kalepu: So when we go with sub word level and how there certain words are breaking down certain words maybe as it is right. So what is the criteria generally it will go yeah
The Admin: Okay, this goes to all of you. I just showed you TOC which is called a table of content. That is a top topic number three. You're on topic number two. So, anything from topic one and two. Okay, and by the way, when you ask me a question, u don't start like this. I'm sorry. I was on mute. Hi Rohan, I have a question. you've just wasted 30 seconds for everyone, Just jump to the question. I know I love you and you have a serious question to Also, jump.
Vasu Bansal: here on so some words in English do tend to have some Latin origin but similarly in Hindi there are words borrowed from so is there any special care taken for them
The Admin: Yes, we have characters also. So if the smallest subvers so character is always available for us. So there's something we can never tokenize, we fall back to character automatically.
The Admin: You will also see that in the topic three guru once we do it before even we start thinking about the model and…
Guru Prasadh K: Yeah, this process of tokenization and training the model is going to be a continuous process with respect to a particular model. How is it
The Admin: we decide it there and this is one of the most important question because moment you decide this you're actually committing to a price point you're commit committing to your time you're committing to a kind of performance. So this determines how fast our model is. and decide it is decided at the first meeting for any LM discussion.
dharshan thaigu: Yeah so as you mentioned that initially we will decide that the sub word level of tokens has been used. So later we want to train under the character level. Is it possible we can do that or…
dharshan thaigu: it is only once we can able to work. Thanks.
The Admin: only one…
The Admin: but sub world level as I said will always have characters and in the data if you had it you're already training on it okay urban Yes,…
Arpan Das: If we are creating this based on the subwords then why sometimes there is a need to fine-tune based for a domain specific model the subwords will remain the same if I am done it for English I will get the same subwords when I do it for a medical domain or for a finance domain but why there is sometimes a need to finetune
The Admin: good question. let us say that we did not focus on biology. And our tokenizer did not have bioluminescence as a word and you are not training specifically for that particular context. So how many times I have to repeat a token to just represent bioluminescence? Three times right? That means my model has to work three times just to say something. Right?
Arpan Das: Yes.
The Admin: it has not even finished the word and the model has to run three times. So that again what is happening and I'm just going to be doing a very big approximation So let us say our model has just a context of thousand tokens divided by three. suddenly you have a context of 333 tokens to talk about that topic and how much can we say in 333 words compared to thousand. So you have less context to even go deeper in that topic. That's why when you're saying domain specialization, it's not finetuning by the way because if you're just doing fine-tuning, then you're probably just adding more data. So it gets better in small context or at least have some context. But if you want to train, for example, someone says that I have a foundation model for biology. That means this is not going to be a subword. This is going to be the full word because this is part of the tokenizer. So in one word, I understand what is quantum or what is bioluminous or the complex word that we keep seeing.
00:30:00
The Admin: Shik, we have only one unknown.
abhishek Kumar: Yeah Rohan. So can we have unknown in subword level as well?
The Admin: Yes, we added.
abhishek Kumar: It can occur in subword level as well.
The Admin: Yes, We have special tokens. And you'll see why special tokens are also there. We have somewhere around 50 60 I'll say backup tokens.
The Admin: Why are they there? We'll discuss when we discuss tok to tokenizer later on. But we are discussing tokenization today with their guests.
abhishek Kumar: Yeah, thank you.
Sandeep Kunkunuru: Yeah, One is that give me one Two-part questions I guess. One is if we were to use root words or common prefixes and common suffixes, would that not help because you're using musing and…
Sandeep Kunkunuru: breaking it into two parts where you're picking up the suffix. The second question is if you were to look at grammarss of each languages and nom chsky's grammarss or otherwise would that not help if you create a or something like that would that not
The Admin: So we are doing…
The Admin: what we are saying the first one and second so first we are doing that but the problem is that when you say a and grammar and even the first one you're assuming everything is deterministic the problem is it is not right grammar there are rules that are broken in a particular language for that particular grammar also even sanskit has two different kind of grammar the puny grammar and the grammar that is being used by people then we have older sanskrit where the grammar is also slightly
The Admin: different right? So these keep on changing. So because things are not deterministic, we need to come up with algorithm which understands the grammar structure, understands how the root words are there and how to break them automatically while making sure that it is still not fragile when a rule is broken, it can actually still create a word. So we are doing exactly what you said A and B, but we're doing it in such a way that we are not relying on the determinism of the algorithms that they provide. statistically driven. So even if the rule is broken, we have a backup for So short answer, Vishal ask me at the end of the question,…
Vishal Reddy: How can we use a tokeniz tokenizers to determine DNA?
The Admin: we can't determine a DNA. We can sequence a DNA. So when you ask me this question at the end of the session, I will ask you how does the DNA look like?
The Admin: Unfamiliar doesn't need a glossy,…
Chaitali Debp: So Rohan when we say unfamiliar form split and common words stay whole is there a glossaryy where we are classifying which are unfamiliar which are common.
The Admin: right? It's unfamiliar, not part of a vocabulary.
Chaitali Debp: I mean when you are dealing with large corpus will there Okay.
The Admin: Yeah, we just put E and K for that. But that won't happen for us in subword because we can still use alphabets to represent it. Pratik. Yeah.
Pratik Mukherjee: So I go back to Urban's question. I understood the explanation you gave except for the little part where you hypothesized that 1,000 divided by three and you did something and said that the context is getting lost or getting reduced. Can you please explain that a little bit more?
The Admin: So came up with the server 30 model sometime back last year and claimed that we are India we are really good on indic languages. They did not work on a tokenizer for Ora properly. Okay, that meant that it was so bad that every single word was actually just a character. That mean that meant that if English to say a sentence in English took 10 words or 10 tokens to say the same thing in Ora it took somewhere around 10 into 140. let us say you're talking to me and your context length is,000. So you can say a lot in thousand words but let me divide that by 14.
The Admin: The same thing has to be said in you can only say 71 characters of Ora compared to thousand words of English. Does that make sense?
Pratik Mukherjee: Yes, it does. Thank you.
The Admin: Okay. With it as I said before we start training a model we have to commit…
Udit Singhania: What about different languages like u English then you said Hindi is there then we go with Russian. So all of them are different languages completely different So…
00:35:00
The Admin: how many language are we going to support and it just does not mean that I know a word like anuling which is a German word I have to train on it also.
The Admin: So not only we have to decide what languages are we going to support in the tokenizer and have them in the tokenizer we have to collect that data set and train on it also. So it just doesn't stop there. So it is done before we start training the needed model learns that automatically.
Udit Singhania: then do we map it cat map is to really do we map do we do something like that or it's not needed okay thank
The Admin: Okay, very complex word.
Dattatreya Manjunath: Yeah, I'm going back to the earlier question where you said at subword level you'll have unknown tokens. I'm just curious at unknown at subword level will we not have characters as backup also?
The Admin: No, no, no, no. That's not what I said.
The Admin: I said I have one unknown token reserved and like that I have 50 other reserved tokens…
The Admin: which are used for things that are different. It's used for example end of sentence. I have only one unknown token and that is literally for things that people have not planned for. I may want to add image data or I may want to add a B64 PNG image. Right? these are things that model never provide that in the UN format because we still want an experimental way of sending in something only one.
Dattatreya Manjunath: You can see the way of
Dattatreya Manjunath: Ste.
The Admin: Sesh Nathan is going to be the last question.
Suyash Patel: Yeah, I also have a two-part question. This is a followup to Sep's question. you mentioned that we use subword level tokenization because there is some level of nondeterminism in languages. But for instance, if I was only training on let's say code.
Suyash Patel: So I have a particular language and that grammar is well defined. Can I maybe just use And just another clarification.
The Admin: If you…
The Admin: if you do guarantee that everything deterministic then yes assuming there's no spelling mistake even for creation of the function names the camel case and the other underscore other stuff is consistent and nobody's going to do any mistake and when you're writing
The Admin: English there because you will have to write comments and other things also you're committing that you're only going to use a fixed set of dictionary then yes second one second even in even there you will still fail…
Suyash Patel: So if I understand correctly in the subword level tokenization we will have fallbacks.
The Admin: because sometimes in the log we have time data also and…
The Admin: time comes in seconds and other stuff so you will still have to figure out some way of writing down every single time second.
Suyash Patel: Okay. yeah and…
Suyash Patel: and yeah I think I do and…
The Admin: Yeah. Yes.
Suyash Patel: in the just another clarification for subword level tokenization if I understand correctly we will have a fall back to characters if we cannot break is that correct? Okay. Yeah, thanks.
The Admin: That's why there's no way to come up with a solution that is better than some word and character like you can think of everything's fake deterministic but time what about seconds what about the units right you can't store 3.14 how do you store pi value you can't dedicate a single token for that can't hear Yeah,…
The Admin: but your sound is like coming from moon.
Nithin G: Yeah. …
Nithin G: how does this kind of
The Admin: Please write down your question. Can't hear you at all. Kim Raj, last question.
The Admin: Sitting last question.
Khemraj rathore: So tokenizer works on spellings basically…
Khemraj rathore: but when we're interacting with LMS we say spellings don't matter as much. So how does that works? Basically okay so point beams for example…
The Admin: You said two wrong things.
The Admin: I don't know how to even start. You said Tokenizer works on the words or subword level.
Khemraj rathore: if I have a wrong spelling so I want to let's bioluminescence and I have a wrong spelling for that.
The Admin: Here is example for that. In case suburb will have a color and R. Yes.
Khemraj rathore: But when we are interacting with LLM so even if we say color R it will understand that we talking about color so how does that work okay so we have example for both color as well as color R Yeah.
The Admin: From the data that we train on no intelligence. That's why models are intelligent. You will not have to create every single spelling mistake for the It will understand the context. I can give you an example. I bought an iPhone from dash store. What is this dash?
00:40:00
Khemraj rathore: Yeah. some store like Apple store,…
Khemraj rathore: Samsung store.
The Admin: I don't even have to mention the word right.
The Admin: So even if you use dash there it will understand exactly that's…
Khemraj rathore: So even if you write the spelling like C O L R it will basically understand due to its intelligence not because the example was there or something like that.
The Admin: why neural networks right that's why lms and I call it all right moving on so I hope you understand the difference in character word and subword level and there's a cost associated to it you cannot just say that my tokenizer has indic languages hence I'm good at Hindi
The Admin: No, you have to train on it also. So It's a full commitment. The moment you say that our tokenizer will have Polish language or a Swedish all the Scandinavian languages or German, you have to train on it also, It's literally like Sanhan you have to then train on it, right? You can't just sit my work is done tokenizer is done. No moment you say tokenizer, you've written a will. you have written the whole constitution of how the model has to be trained. One of the most important decision that people don't take very seriously. Okay, moving on.
The Admin: Same thing is again repeated to explain in a slightly different way because now we just add one more topic to what we were discussing. So here again we're looking the color of the sky is blue the same sentence that we discussed earlier and let me just pause here. So we are right now at the character level. So same thing the color of the sky is blue certain characters we'll have 23 tokens vocabulary is going to be somewhere around 100 characters is good enough right 26 characters in and let's say all small letters only so we save some discussion so 100 characters will cover two three languages very in fact the moment you add Hindi we'll cross 100 but let us say we add 100 we are only focusing on English okay because here examples are English so there are 23 tokens good I can make any word that is possible so the sequence length pressure is very high what is the pressure sequence length is
The Admin: the context length that we spoke about earlier, When Google says that my Anthropic says that Fable and other models have a context of 1 million, they're saying the sequence length is Up to 1 million tokens, my model is not going to behave badly. It will be very tired like it wants to go home, it wants to stop, but it will still work. another thing that is linked to this 1 million is the hardware capacity. moment you keep adding more and more characters or more words or more tokens or more sequence then the amount of RAM required that is huge. Every single word is the instance itself. 200 billion parameter model predicting a word has to be in the memory and it has to repeat right. So it's a huge model that needs to be in the memory. What repeats we'll discuss but a lot of stuff gets repeated. Right?
The Admin: So when you say 1 million there's a hardware limitation also to a user who's talking to an LLM and is asking key let's say a user start talking to Opus 4.8 rate of fable that give me an idea where without going out of home using 100 rupees I can become a billionaire and blah and that's a discussion it is having now that guy anthropic will be thinking from there and that for this person how do I even explain that it's not possible but the model still has to keep on growing and keep on taking the hardware there's a hardware limitation also every account every time you talk to JPD or Gemini or anthropic there's a model fixed for you of course we have batch processing other things also to optimize stuff
The Admin: But there is a hardware lock for you linked to you, right? So that's a big nightmare. So we have a huge sequence length pressure if you're on the character level because we have to now say the color of the sky is blue which could have been set in 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 tokens. Now we are going to take 23 tokens. So that term is called sequence pressure. We don't want a sequence pressure on our model. vocabulary explosion pressure is not there at all. You cannot now come up with a word that is stuff that is not there because everything is made of alphabets right so we are very clear they are very easy we'll never have a unk kind of situation practical balance definitely no it's very very bad balance now the next focus is the then word level the sequence pressure is very less because if I don't know the word I'll just say unk right but the problem is that we cannot have all unks in our token
The Admin: context or the model context and there are words that definitely need some connection by elimination. For example, if you're talking about things that glow in dark, then that word is going to be used a lot of times. So, we represent We need to learn context also and the problem is that sequestion pressure is small because I can represent it better but the vocab explosion pressure is very high. My vocabulary can immediately explode. moment you write code for example let's say you're writing code and you're writing code for India and you want it to be sovereign and So you keep writing in word that are very Indian right for example bharat matak function or let's say sadhant checker you can come up with different words and the vocabulary will just explode we will just not be able to look at and remember anything practical balance is good from the word perspective but really bad from the vocabulary explosion.
00:45:00
The Admin: So again not a great idea but the moment we go on a subword level the sequence pressure is maintainable the vocabulary explosion pressure is maintainable and that's the practical balance that's where we find the sweet spot right so all this graph is telling you is what is the sequence length pressure now same for real long word also and for morphological rich words and in the example as well right in all these cases you're going to see that BP is going to be winning okay now I also wanted to look at
The Admin: this cool example if I select S S token right helps talks walks you can see S itself even though it's just an alphabet comes in these forms in the collection of words I have ing working playing you can see replaying is made from three this example by the way this may not be how final it is stored okay just to explain to you then we have fearlessness then we are powerless. Play comes in play plate, playing player can't store all of these tokens. If you think about it, vocabulary is just not going to be the words that we find in Oxford dictionary when we look at the index. It has to be all these forms also, right?
The Admin: You can't just say you remember Sanskriti then in my schools we had few more things and something then we have for example read red reads reading then then we readers we can't have all of these in the vocabulary that's why we are saying that when we go with word level and you think that you can come up with a only word based tokenizer please tell yourself that word read a word or help or learn It's just not a single thing. You have to make one word for one token for each one of them. So, it's going to be huge, Nightmare. So, same thing explained here again if you want to play just alone and don't want to look at it. So, why tokenize a loadbearing? The meaning of loadbearing is that has a cost associated with it. it's like saying that u you're going to buy let's say a Ferrari in Bangalore. So, buying Ferrari is loadbearing.
The Admin: You may have money but let's say Porsche because that example I know let's say you buy a Porsche. Do you know A cost of fixing the puncher not changing the tire. Anyone here knows the cost of fixing a puncher off a Ferrari? Sur is immediately answering you Ferrari Fes. no it's somewhere around 60,000 right? You may have a friend who can do it for 25. But if you call Porsche and say my Ferrari punch 60,000 to fix, The engine Everything is different. So buying Ferrari's load bearing, right? Not that I bought 2 cr Ferrari, you borch it, two cror you'll get. but after that the maintenance is difficult. Okay. So why tokenize the load bearing?
The Admin: That the trade-off is in your hand, that what makes sense to be explicit about you want a character base or a subword based or a vocabulary based. Whatever you fix now is going to fix our LM architecture. Let us say we have thousand tokens. That's Vocabulary is the total number of tokens we have agreed on. Total number let's say characters 100 would work for English. words as I discussed there are just too many of them. We saying playing. All of those are also need to be there because You're going to save They're huge. The total number of vob or the vocabulary length or total number of tokens that I'll have is going to be very very large for words, right? And let us say we had a sub word there.
The Admin: there in some words we have to come up with the number right we cannot say that I'll figure out you have to commit to it again you have to say that my tokenizer will be 100,000 my tokenizer will be 131k or my tokenizer will be 252k we'll discuss why these numbers but you have to first say that okay these are the number of tokens I want to have we anyways have characters we miss anything characters will take care of it but let's say we say it is thousand now when a neural network predicts Right. it's going to predict in a thing called how many of know about this? I don't know. But it's going to use something called a one hot vector. Do you know what is a one hot vector?
00:50:00
abhishek Kumar: Encoding.
The Admin: One hot vector is a vector which is very hot, right?
The Admin: It's very well-dressed. It's wearing a coat very beautiful here, And it shines in front of everyone, So let us say we had vector 3, vector 4. All of them look same. So the one hot vector is going to be the hottest vector of them. So it will become one. So when our neural network predicts, it's going to predict 0 0 1 0. So let us say we had a b and c and d. When we say the model is predicting C, it has to say 0 0 0 1 0. we say it has to predict 1 0 0 0. This is one hot vector, right? So now when we say we had thousand tokens, we will have thousand such slots, right? So in fact it should not be drawing it. I should have these thousand slots and let's say the model had to say a particular token E. And let's say this was RE. So what is the model going to predict?
The Admin: 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0. Is this clear? So if I had 100,000 tokens, the last layer in the new network have to have 100,000 slots. If I say that my tokenizer was 131K, my last layer will have to have 13107. That's the actual number. it's a two power something again we'll come back to that later on. But these are the number of slots it has to have each slot dedicated in advance to a particular In future it can't happen that this token used to be and then you decide no I don't like it let's change it to a not possible even before we start training we have decided this is the ID number one ID number two ID number three.
The Admin: So at id number 14 what token is there is already decided otherwise model will not be able to predict 14 for some word So when we say we have 131,000 tokens we are in the vocabulary the model has to have a layer where it will just say one and 131,71 nos right that's the last layer okay any specific question just on this I saw some hands raised so maybe there are okay Raja okay I will do that
Rajaa saravanan: Rohan, can you repeat this once again?
The Admin: Yes.
Ganeshkumar Chandrasekaran: for example if you're not going to write something and this number of tokens of the output layer includes English Sanskrit every language right for example if I upront I'm going to write it funny in English will it take those English tokens alone and is there a way to predict from those alone or it is going to take the whole of the stuff and…
The Admin: The hole.
Ganeshkumar Chandrasekaran: the okay…
The Admin: The hole.
Ganeshkumar Chandrasekaran: but is it a good idea Okay.
The Admin: No, wait. But let's do half of this right now. Let's do half it. GPU doesn't like that. GPU works in a very different way. We'll talk about that. Abishek the ID of the token. Right.
abhishek Kumar: So you said that each of these cell in this vector represent one ID of the token.
The Admin: So we take the tokens and…
abhishek Kumar: Mhm. and…
The Admin: we write them in a certain order. That order is fixed. So 1 2 3 4 15 token 17th token.
abhishek Kumar: what if we have two ones or three one? What does those mean?
The Admin: Not possible.
abhishek Kumar: Intuitively not possible.
The Admin: Not possible. Train to predict one at the higher level. It is not by the way going to predict one or zero. It's going to predict 0.019 0.10 something.
The Admin: So we see the maximum one and we send it to softmax. Sort max is going to convert into if you don't know what salt max are the stuff later on but that's what is happening.
abhishek Kumar: And that's…
abhishek Kumar: why we say it will always predict the next word something like
The Admin: It will always predict the one and two numbers ever in the world are same especially in your network and in your family also my favorite example if your parents told you that they love you and your brother you and your sister and they were lying they always loving one more than the other so in maths when the new network predicts same thing happened one is always going to be slightly more than the other one okay Arun we train on it.
abhishek Kumar: Thanks. Thanks.
Arun Aravind: So Rohan you said that in one hot vector what's happening is you give the example a b cde e and when you said that for c it if the value is one and for the rest of them it is zero so then that will be considered okay so what makes that actually consider as one I mean how does that system understand Okay.
00:55:00
The Admin: So when it predicts this a B we say dude this is supposed to be C and we do something called back propagation.
The Admin: So the model learns I have to predict How do I predict C? By making that one. So it's a part of the training.
Arun Aravind: Okay.
The Admin: Okay Sin slightly different very very off context it will confuse all of the people…
Sachin Bharadwaj: Rohan let's say we want to design for multi modalities let's say for audio and image then the tokenizer we up front allocate number of tokens for that in the tokenizer and do a training of that or positi Okay.
The Admin: if I talk about it. I won't explain but moment we are in the embedding session. you asked that question there it is related to embedding not.
The Admin: Okay. done.
Vardhan Walavalkar: Siran I know this is not possible …
Vardhan Walavalkar: but I just want to know why I'm not sure. So you are predicting a single integer position of the one hot vector So why can't you have a binary representation of that number and…
The Admin: Question I've tried that also.
Vardhan Walavalkar: that is what you predict instead of having one hot vector.
The Admin: But the problem is that the number just do a mental exercise later on after a session. how many can you predict if I have to predict 1 3 1 0 72 or see how many of numbers in binary can you predict and the model becomes really bad at it second I don't only need to know on average there are 11 words that mean exactly the same thing for every single language and…
The Admin: my English is not so good so I can't give you a lot of examples but every language has around 11 words that would fit that context it's
Vardhan Walavalkar: Okay.
The Admin: it's a mathematical number. So America is a great country, America is a big country, America is an amazing country. What word are we saying there?
The Admin: So we don't like to just pick the maximum one. We like to see this model is saying these three four let me pick one. That is where the creativity comes from. So I just don't want one. I just want the oneish big numbers there. So it defeat together…
Vardhan Walavalkar: So are you saying sorry are you sorry?
Vardhan Walavalkar: Are you saying that some of these equivalent words are clustered together in the one hot vector space also? No. Similar.
The Admin: but the values are similar.
Vardhan Walavalkar: Okay.
The Admin: Yeah, there's no way to cluster them together…
Vardhan Walavalkar: Thank you.
The Admin: because order is fixed while we make it and there we don't have a similar representation for that. Narayana I think I have to take his full name Satya Narayana Morti not speaking again last attempt Mr.
Satyanarayana Murthy Toleti: Yeah, I got it. There's some muting problem.
The Admin: Okay. Yes,…
Satyanarayana Murthy Toleti: These tokenizers even the imaging token also can be given to this one.
The Admin: we'll discuss.
Satyanarayana Murthy Toleti: Okay.
The Admin: All Okay. I'll just explain this once again because someone requested it.
Syed Abdul: Sorry, I was asking you you did mention that once the model is trained and…
The Admin: Go ahead.
Syed Abdul: everything you cannot change the position in that embedding layer but what…
The Admin: Yeah. No,…
Syed Abdul: if I change the ID lookup also will that work or the models have been trained there to look at
The Admin: It will enter mental crisis. So, let us say in only these words the cat sad already there So how many tokens do we have here?
abhishek Kumar: All right.
Khemraj rathore: Bye.
Rishikesh Kumar: Ice cream.
The Admin: So using the algorithm when I'm making my tokenizer let us say this is how they came out. Cat start the should come first.
The Admin: We'll discuss why on and then Matt let us say okay let us say in the tokenizer when we making it this is the order in which they were saved what are the ids ID 0 1 2 3 4 you clear on it okay then how do I write this how is this sent to the computer or what is the LM expected to predict so both are same right what we send is what we want it to also predict right
The Admin: So we want the model to predict five tokens. 1 2 3 4 right and then I have to do the cat on the mat. So 6 * 1 if I draw six I'm sorry. Okay somewhere it will be six. So the first is How do I write this is one. So this is 1 0 0 0. This is what is sent to the embedding layer. This is what we want the model to predict when it's predicting the Cat is zero here. All right. So 1 0 Then this one. SAT is here. This is one here. So this is one 0 0 0.
01:00:00
The Admin: cash What On is here. This is third one. So 0 1 2 3 0 and zero. Then we have the going back to this one again. So we have two here which means 0 1 2. Okay. And then we have the mat which is the last one, the fourth one. So it's going to be 0 0 uh 0 1 2 3 4 one hot encoding. Are we clear on this? I may have done a mistake here. I think so. Are we All right. So that's the loadbearing concept. let us look at something more. So why tokenizer is loadbearing?
The Admin: So let us say we made a tokenizer that is English favoring right it was made only using English data set. so for making a tokenizer we need a data set. Yes. How else you think bioluminesence will enter the tokenizer? So the process of tokenization needs the data set. Are you clear on this? Not only you have to tell yourself I'm going to support Ura and Bengali and English and Polish and Russian and German, Italian, right? You can write a dream that I'm going to support all the languages but the moment you write the dream you have some I'm going to come next to your ear and tell you you have to collect that data set also. So that's the most important thing you need to know. You can't just say English, Hindi, English, maths, coding and French and bio and legal and other stuff. No, you can't.
The Admin: future you have to get that data set also right so the first thing but let us say we had an English favoring so we favor English some other language just came in right for example if you're watching some English movie some German and some Spanish will automatically come in so those words have also come in so in that case let's say our model width was 2048 what is the model width and the context window is 1024 and these two numbers we need to understand okay model width
The Admin: here talks about how many have I mentioned? one first cover this. There should be one more thing that should change. it's a full thing. I have to show you on this one. Why is it weird?
The Admin: So, I have to show you the whole thing. let us say we've started with a data set that had English and some of the tokens automatically came In that case, when we are writing this line, the irrigation pump stopped during the night. For English, I just need But for tel I will need 36 tokens to represent the same thing. I don't know how to read telos. So I'm sorry But for that I will have to use 36 tokens. Right now if we had character leaning then even for English and Telugu you can see it is bumping to 58 tokens and 74 tokens. Right? So that is massive. Subord balancing as we discussed is going to be helping us.
The Admin: And in both the cases English actual lang is always going to be less compared to the total number of tokens required there because here you're seeing 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 represented in 14 tokens right. So calc leaving as you know is going to be always heavy. So u and this is for English figuring so balance of is required. When we balance of word we are saying that we need to have focus on other languages why we're making it also. Okay.
The Admin: What does it mean? So the logic is the tokenizer we start with here. So vocabulary size is an embedding table commitment. As we discussed the cat on the mat we had the coming twice but overall I have five. vocabulary size how many tokens I have in the vocabulary is the embedding table commitment. Now a new network's first layer is called the embedding layer and the last layer is called lm head. How many tokens are we predicting? Right. the slots in that. So that commitment is made the moment you make a tokenizer. So the model architecture the first layer and last layer is automatically decided. Any question on this? Moment you decide the total vocabulary size in your token the first layer and the last layer is already decided half of it. very important to remember that's The second step in the model each and we saw this in the last time also.
01:05:00
The Admin: In fact, you have done assignment on this also or you saw that some of the words were clustering together because the embedding The total number of vectors required to represent a specific token is to the embedding dimension that is called a width here. So 204 8192 the model when you talk about chargus and others they have 17,000 dimensions for each token. That is the amount of context it can learn about a specific word So this number is essentially something you can decide without deciding on the vocabulary. And the context window is how long you want to train your model. We have to have data set for that. But vocabulary size is going to determine the embedding layer and in total number of neurons in the input layer and output layer are immediately decided. You decide the total number of tokens. Now I want to change this and you'll see some numbers changing at the bottom.
The Admin: I'm sorry I created this at a vertical one. Moment I have English favoring here. I wanted to just read this is changing when I'm changing English this balance this and character this. So let's go to English again and let's see what happens here. compute cost is 3x 3x for what? So we have 12 tokens here for English and we have 36 tokens for Telugu. 36id 12 is 3. So for a language that you have not built a good tokenizer on, you're going to be spending three times more tokens to say the same thing. Let's look at it in English to say So by o luminous I'm not bioluminesence for a tokenizer that new bioluminesence we'll just need one tokenizer.
The Admin: But if we didn't work on it properly, we'll have to break it down into three and we have to use three tokens for saying the Same thing is happening here when we're comparing for indic languages and the model that earlier ones now these are really good. The older models had to compute three times more just to say the same thing. Is it making sense to say train one LM call but Sanri Hindi word for train? Do you know the Hindi word for train?
The Admin: anyone it's called load gi thing that goes on a steel road or iron road gam is a Hindi word for that so law gami so three divided into three right because we never train on it so if you're not going to train on a data set or if you're not going to make other languages a part of a tokenizer you'll have to spend more to say the same thing so just to say train I have to use three * 4 context coverage is going to be 1/3 So earlier I could say th00and words in thousand tokens because vocabulary was good but now I can only say 1,000 divid by 3 333 words only to say the same thing and it makes sense to quickly draw this and show it to you.
The Admin: So I'm not going to write it because I want you to understand using this. My model had to work four times to speak these four tokens. But let us say my model was bad and not trained in a specific language. Each word was now broken down into three. So this is broken down into one, two and three further. Right? This is also broken down into one, two and three further. And this is broken down into one two and three further. And let us say my context length is fixed. My context length let's say was 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12. Let us say my context length was Impossible. But for example, just keep that in mind. my model is only trained to speak 12 words. So here I can say in some language I am a great boy who loves study and playing cricket and eating food.
The Admin: But in this language I can only say the model stopped right. So first the total number of tokens now represents less of that language and to be able to say I am a great boy who loves playing cricket and eating food I have to use more tokens. That is the meaning that is what we mean when we look at that particular table here right that is the compute cost going three times that is the context coverage reducing by three the embedding table is going to be huge then scalability and coverage is going to be brittle because when I'm just using words and languages which are not covered I have to use more characters and language fairness is bad right now let's change it to character level the moment the character level
01:10:00
The Admin: is there the compute cost is 1.28 tokens and we are comparing languages here by the way right we're not comparing subword versus character we're just comparing languages here so English and Telico tokenizer if we just using characters not a lot of difference compared to English only 1.28 to it context coverage same whatever context we had for English characters we'll have around 80% of that for indic spelling and coverage I can represent everything I want because spellings can cover everything language fairness yes it's there but very very expensive and my embedding table is going to be very small I'm going to come back to embedding table separately but the moment we have again a balance of word where we have code representation for good all the languages you're going to see that the compute cost is going to be slightly more for Hindi or Telugu or others compared
The Admin: to English. You can flip by the way you can create a model which is good at English, good at Hindi and bad at English because you have more words for Hindi or Indian languages and less for English. Depends on what the final use case for the model Context coverage is also Emitting table I'm saying 5 24 here. Displayability and cover is Language fairness near parity all are considered really good. So let me change go back here because this number I want you to notice this number and this number. if I go back to 2048 that number changes and my embedding table becomes 262 MB. If I change to 4096 it increases and if I increase to 8 it will double up. Similarly on the context window you see that this is changing. So that is same for all. So not a lot of difference.
The Admin: We're going to discuss how this numbers change just in the next bottom one. So don't worry on Any question on this? Okay. Yeah,…
rohit fattepur: So Rohan even for tokenization for different languages. So we need to train that model on those language right because it has to understand the context or doesn't need okay
The Admin: of course we have to. But this thing was about something else. We said that we want to cover Telugu, Hindi and others but we are talking about how balanced it is for that language. Have we spent enough time to collect good subword for that language?
The Admin: English favoring is we had so much data on English that English subwords were taken care of but Telugu were not character anyways we don't want so balanced subword means that you have enough data of every language in equal proportion to come up with a tokenizer that has a good representation of subwords for all languages that's…
The Admin: what required in tokenizer it's trained on Yes.
rohit fattepur: So where I'm going to is for now charg supports all the languages mostly for India right so correct so did they train those models individually for embeddings of those or…
rohit fattepur: I'm so it is one multilingual embedding that was trained.
The Admin: Not individually together. It has to be done together. Abishek.
abhishek Kumar: Rohan, can you repeat model width and context window once please?
The Admin: That's why the next visit is on this so don't worry. Okay. Moving on.
The Admin: One choice paid on every request forever. I want this to get into your head so strongly and that's why I'm repeating it so many times that you need to understand how important this is because this is literally the soul of the model. This is the language the model is going to speak. If you do not focus on coding for example, coding needs to be part of the tokenizer. If you want a model to be really good in Python, it has to have the tokenizer built for Python. Because we have let's say C++ right so we have this thing called include how many of about this if this is not in the tokenizer if this thing is not in the tokenizer it has to say hash and then include two instead of one 50% compression in just using one tokenizer right you have to keep this in mind that if you're targeting your model and if you're saying my model needs to be good in coding we have to think about these things and that the whole thing has to be one token because otherwise you're spending 52 times more token
The Admin: Conser two times the processing power just to say include which is lit letter in dot h5 files and cesh we'll discuss that I'm telling you…
Ganeshkumar Chandrasekaran: For example the word include sometimes when we tokenize it it may get split into three subwords but how do we say for Python it should be taken as a single word while training okay Okay.
01:15:00
The Admin: what needs to be there how is going to come soon bali Yes.
Balaji Chunduri: So the expertise of language is also important in tokenization is it the language expertise or domain expertise when we are and so when anthropic is doing so many languages so are they calling in experts from all these languages and they okay just one question so this is all about embedding learning right it's not even training here okay and…
The Admin: Just look at the Job portal and LinkedIn. You'll see they have language domain experts scattered Such an
The Admin: We're talking stream tokenizer. We've not even gone to embedding. That is the next session.
Balaji Chunduri: we will be designing our own embedding rather than using some embedding in this course is it okay yeah understood
The Admin: You are again getting confused in embedding and tokenizer. we talking about tokenizer. Yes. we are going to design a tokenizer which will make our own But embedding is learned. So we are not making embedding sort. such by making sure you have enough data for all you will see the algorithm and…
Sachin Bharadwaj: Yeah, let's say you want to target all the possible languages that you speak on the globe. so how do you figure out the training set for tokenizer is balanced for every possible language? How do we measure that?
The Admin: you'll understand how okay okay again one choice paid on every request for all which means that if you do not train on a using a good tokenizer built for all the languages including Python+ sharp HTML because
The Admin: All of you can make a widget now right. but that means enthropic had to train on HTML also. So every single language and when we say language not only the language that and language the computers also speak compile language when we say CUDA kernel every damn thing has to say part of the data set because we want to support it. You can't say that my model cannot write a CUDA or a C+ code. It's bad at Python can't right because you want to say a model is good. So you have to cover everything. Okay. let us say this artificial intelligence is changing the world thing in In Hindi we have kima dun right. So in English let's say we had eight tokens and in Hindi we had 18 tokens. the ratio of this 18 divid by is what? 18 by 8 comes out to be 2.25
The Admin: 25 around 2.3 that thing is called a fertility tax are we clear on this of fertility ratio compared to English we generally tend to compare with English because English is the predominant language and there's a fertility per language also how many words are there in this can you count artificial intelligence is changing the world six but how many tokens were used to represent this eight so now 8 divide by 6 1.33 is the fertility of English for this tokenizer. So whenever you hear the word called fertility this means that how many tokens were represented on average to say one word. So for English it is 1.33. let's call the Hindi fertility. Here I'm seeing 1 2 3 4 5 6 and 7. So 18 divide by 7. The fertility here is 2.54. Bad.
The Admin: very very important to understand this is al assignment also by the way so fertility of a language is the total number of tokens required to say the same thing in that language so for English we are seeing eight tokens were needed for saying six words so the fertility for English here is 1.3 around 1.16 1.2 Two is a very very good number for Hindi. We are seeing that we had six 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 words. But overall how many? 18 were required. 18 by 7. 2.57 is the fertility of Hindi here. So what is the fertility of English? 1.33. What is the fertility of Hindi here? 2.57. What is the fertility ratio of Hindi to English?
The Admin: that is going to be the same thing set in both languages. So 18 by8 which is 2.3 here. So that is how bad our model is going to be on Hindi. So my model will have to process 3 times 230% more compared to English to say the same thing and it'll have 100 / 2.3 only 43% context length compared to English. Let's go to Bengali because you'll have these number change for all in Bengali. Now we have gone to 22 tokens. So now we have 1 2 3 4 5 22 divided by five. My fertility is so bad that now we are at 4.4. We have a fertility tax of 2.8 compared to English. Just because you decided to train your tokenizer on English only data set. Telugu 25. So now we have 25 divid by 1 2 3 4 6.25 fertility. Right. And then Tamil 27.
01:20:00
The Admin: So 1 2 3 4 27 / 4 we have 6.75 right and you can see for tax has gone to 3.4 four Spanish 1.3 because Spanish Latin similar words and maybe the data set had more Spanish of course it's being trained by us and other guys they'll have a lot of Mexicans and Spanish people Spain and other people whose languages are covered in the TV series and the news and other stuff and SMSs and people part of it but Hindi Bengali tu unless you decide that you're going to be adding that data set here it will not be good right so we discussed two things one thing is called fertility ratio between languages other thing is called fertility
The Admin: tax which is the fertility ratio between languages and language fertility which is how many tokens were used to represent the words inside that sentence which is we are seeing here is starting from 2 point some number goes up to 6.5 that's the number that we need to control so when you train a tokenizer how do we stop what is the total number token sequence or what is my vocabulary size is a function of these targets let me again repeat how many tokens we need finally 100,000 131,000 252,000 and so on is directly related to first how good your algorithm is to figure out a words let's say we have figured out the best one after that what are these numbers for every single language you want okay now I'm going to open the paper that we wrote which called tokenizer
The Admin: So this is a paper that we wrote in last and I wanted to read this. I will read it of course because I have the mic. So on 27 million documents of public indicing text 2.84 billion words collected from 46.2
The Admin: to EV data with trainer running tokenizer. It produces 26.7% lesser token than Mistral Nemo token which is a server copy for the same budget class with per language savings of 15% for Tamil 76% for Odia or 4.31 compression ratio. And I wanted to read this on non-indic context the R tokenizer matches the base English fertility of 2.3 to in fact we are slightly worse in English. What does it mean? The best tokenizer, so O200K_ base here is the name of the OpenAI tokenizer. So their tokenizer has a fertility of 1.232 tokens for English. What does it mean? That on average they need 20% more tokens compared to the words. So if they had 10 words around 12 words are 12 If they had 100 words, 120 tokens are required. That should be very clear, right?
The Admin: So we were slightly worse because we modified their tokenizer and we beat other etc etc. But I want to take you to the table where we mentioning our fertility rate. Finally there should be a table. Yes, this is the fertility and Flores is a really very weird benchmark. So, I had to use that. But, when we designed our own benchmark, we were beating everyone around, right?
The Admin: So this is where we are and here you can see is braic tokenizer and server server 30B by the way has only indic basically focus purely on the index side now and the server one and other other one also now here how many tokens do we have what is the vocabulary size for the tokenizer we built 131,000 what are all the tokenizer on top of it we have gamma which is double the size we have server one which is only indic doesn't have good representation of English only you can See being bad being 1.43 on English means that the very very few because English is dominant there and we have 730B which is double of our tokenizer we are at 1.24
The Admin: 24 on English we are worse in every single thing that you compare here compared to the tos tokeniz the data on top of it but on below that we have the open AI one then we have 7 m kim deepseeek indic and lama here I took a call that these other tokenizer which are gamma of examples in Gujarat you can see the 2.4 2.21 two one so we are slightly better but here you can see for the Hindi 1.64
01:25:00
The Admin: 64 and all the guys which are on top are better than so I have to make two calls here first of all what is my target now language is not the only target I had I had a C++ also as a target I had a Python also a target I have a math also also as a target I have a latex also as a target because if I'm going to write my scientific papers I need to be really good at latte and math and C and Python and so on this table is only for languages so the call I had to take was I am okay to be here while making sure I'm really good at coding and really good at math, That's how we decided to make that tokenizer because when we did that we realized that we are going to be really good in Brahmic as best as possible at the guys on top of us. Now these are anyway double the size which means the first layer and the last layer is double of our size which is a quadratic issue and second this is just designed on all ending languages and no support for the foreign languages only English is supported there.
The Admin: So we are supporting that also but we're going to be really really good at coding and math and corpus allocation and overall other languages also that was our target right we want to be really really good in every single other language there's a table for that also yes so this is vocabulary for English for France for German for Spanish for human evol BBMP
The Admin: MBPP this is a benchmark and GMSK good here means that you're good in all the other benchmarks also then the last table right so when we do discuss about actually making a tokenizer because this session we are not designing a tokenizer we're just understanding what yes so bra tokenizer achieve a 0.295
The Admin: 295 token per character on human eval and 0.32 right so we win on all the other things so our target was not only indic all the brandic languages that we have performance as good as open AI in English so we take care of that have really good performance on coding and math so we did that we have EU languages support also and then we have some other fallback opportunities as well right so we saying that we are going to design the best Indian languages is also not the right
The Admin: All because our tok overall token budget is fixed. How many tokens we want is already fixed in the beginning because if you say we have 252 your last layer and first layer are going to explode. So there has to be balance and that also means that the model size is also in some way getting affected. So we need to remember number of tokens in your tokenizer determines the size of the model and the kind of fertility you will have for every single other language. Right? So this is a fertility tax and your assignment is going to be very similar to it. when you choose a tokenizer then you're going to train on it and then you're going to serve every response. So this tax which you're saying when we say we have our 3.1 tax let's go back to Hindi. So for English if you were spending $40 for Hindi you're going to be spending $90. Should be very clear. We pay by tokens right now. If Bengali was there you will be paying $110. If Telugu Tamil was there you're going to be paying $135. And your context window is also going to be small.
The Admin: Let us say we had a huge context window 114,000 you can read a legal document but in 33,000 you're done and most of the people anyways ask hey I had a question hi Rohan I have a two-part question they're going to waste all the tokens they have in initially these after that they're going to start speaking something right so remember tokenizer is defining these things how much money your users are going to be spending or you're going to be spending right so you choose a tokenizer decide it but after that you train the model
The Admin: And you serve every response and serve every response goes back to this thing one choice paid on every request forever very very important to understand this marketing part I'll take few questions and then move sep we have still not discussed BP don't ask me how BP works because that's the next topic seep No,…
Sandeep Kunkunuru: Yeah, very quickly. are we paying tax because of the encoding length UTF versus AS?
The Admin: no, no. Batto I said BP we have not yet covered.
Sandeep Kunkunuru: No. the orthographic density of any Indian language is higher than English.
The Admin: Don't worry. It is slightly higher.
The Admin: It is always going to be higher than English because UTF and other things are designed for it. But if you do collect Hindi as a main one, you can beat it.
Sandeep Kunkunuru: Okay. Yeah,…
Sandeep Kunkunuru: that was my question. So, if you change the encoding and create a new encoding, you will actually see benefits. Okay.
The Admin: Not BP has nothing to do with encoding. You'll see how. Okay. Shake.
01:30:00
abhishek Kumar: Rohan, so when we say that we need to create tokenization for the language that we want to train on, is it something that we do manually or…
The Admin: Two part answer. We used to do this manually, but now I can ask clot to do it. But you need to still tell it what to do. But it has to be done manually from that context. You have to collect data.
The Admin: You have to run algorithm then you have to come up. Yes. Yeah.
abhishek Kumar: so we have some algorithm to define …
The Admin: That is the Next section of today we're done.
abhishek Kumar: okay. Thank
Vardhan Walavalkar: So Ron how does you said the vocabulary also determines the network input size but the embedding size is fixed right and it's independent of the vocabulary. So what do you mean that it impacts the input thing also?
The Admin: Yeah. Yeah. No. On two accounts. Embedding layer. If you do not this is for others.
The Admin: If you do not understand what I'm talking about, don't ask because this is a complete session on its own which is the next one. We have a Embedding table will have all the tokens that we decide. So let us say we decided on 100 tokens. Then we have a dimension for it which is 2048…
The Admin: which is going to be 16k or 18k also for charge and other models. This is called an embedding table. You clear with that? this was for 100 tokens. If you have thousand tokens, it's going to be bigger, right? If you have 10,000 going to be even bigger.
Vardhan Walavalkar: Yes. Yes.
Vardhan Walavalkar: The table size.
The Admin: So, embedding table size determined directly by and…
Vardhan Walavalkar: Okay. Thanks.
The Admin: so we have Rows are tokens and columns is going to be embedding size.
Gitesh Grover: So when we were comparing different languages for the fertility tax, does this concept also apply when we talking about domains within a language? So for example, you mentioned But code is also written in English. Similarly, if you're talking about health, that may also apply, so within certain language, can we compare different domains based on the data set and compute this for text or am I mixing it up?
The Admin: No, you're not mixing it up.
The Admin: for each domain we have to look at separately and for example this run this is English word run but if you don't store it like this if you don't have an encoder for this then a lot of programming where this is used and in compilers where this will use three tokens to represent this it will have to represent separate so even the word may be there may still have a separate meaning in some other language so we still have to look at it
The Admin: Even if the spelling is same and the character level is still same, we still have to compute for that domain separately. Yes. the question can be better answered by a language expert.
Gitesh Grover: and we still use the same ratios to account for that.
Gitesh Grover: Thank you.
Sachin Bharadwaj: Rohan, if I represent all the languages statistically equally in my data set in a training set, will I still end up paying quarterly tax across languages?
The Admin: My answer to that question is yes and no because thousand words in Hindi and thousand words in Sanskrit will have far more data compared to Hindi and thousand words in Hindi we have far more or less compared to English. So it really depends on what we are picking. Some languages are dense like Sanskrit you saw our own example here where we were looking at Tamil Telugu and others right to say the same thing.
The Admin: here we have 1 2 3 and four but if you go to Hindi you have 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 so even in the Indian languages also there are ways we can combine words so I don't know…
Sachin Bharadwaj: Okay.
The Admin: if I pick the same number of same data exactly will we still have the same output or not so better answer by a language exper but you're close to the solution okay What is the facility of English here?
Soma Korada: I'm still getting confused with that fertility definition. So because the way you're treating the input is space. No, but what I'm so eight tokens that whole sentence is represented but that sentence is x number of words that is by that space delimiter you're saying it's a word right?
The Admin: Right infertility the way fertility is defined by this we can't say that for defining fertility I will consider other scenario also so the algorithm for fertility is This answer is no.
Soma Korada: But programming languages the definition could be different right it's not always the space being a delimiter to So everybody considers the space as a delimiter and treats words as the input.
The Admin: Answer is no. We're going to see centerpiece today and you will get your answer.
01:35:00
Soma Korada: Just think
The Admin: There is a way of handling that as well. Okay. Sana you will see…
saravana alagar: Rohan, how do we account for names, places in terms of kenr in the tokenizer. Okay.
The Admin: when we cover the BP algorithm. But the short answer to that is how frequent it is.
The Admin: Last question.
Nikhil Shrimali: So, Rohan, would it make sense if we have tokenizer for separate languages and then we have a router before if you want to optimize for size? So we'll have a smaller model for example we have an English tokenizer we have an SK tokenizer and…
Nikhil Shrimali: then the embedding would be also different in that case the generalization will not
The Admin: Yeah, I don't think makes sense…
The Admin: because then you have to have English, Hindi, science, math physics, latex, HTML, C++, Python, JavaScript, you see where I'm going? And then mix them also. and when we train unfortunately when you're training only the router for that's a math when you're training the router for JavaScript you still have to train the sunsket router so math sort of fails there people have tried sort of this approach there's a softmax variant of that…
Nikhil Shrimali: Okay, thank you.
The Admin: which does exactly what you're doing but it's like performance is not proven on ground okay s last
The Admin: Our space is there.
Syed Abdul: So for languages like Japanese and Chinese which does not have space if I'm wrong if I'm correct. So how does fertility tax calculated for those in Chinese I think each character itself is word or…
The Admin: You have a word construct there. You have a glyph there.
Syed Abdul: a symbol.
The Admin: It's like Sanskrit.
Syed Abdul: But Yeah.
The Admin: It's like Sanskrit but I just made a word right that is train law which is ir and path which is path i something that goes on top of it. So these characters like that. So when you mix them it represents and they have a representation you have seen keyboards Chinese key you can write Chinese on the moment you can write it that means that you can represent a word using something. All right moving on. SA have a short question.
Siva Ajjapu: Yeah. if we…
Siva Ajjapu: if we replace this with numbering system so we have binary numbers extra decimal and everything. So how can we calculate fatly the rate for that or we don't have numeric system I mean not about words here I'm talking about only numbers here so completely
The Admin: I have no idea…
The Admin: what you're saying. the best approach right now used by the world. You're saying hexad. No. How do I say inference in the numeric system that's…
Siva Ajjapu: replaced by numbers our model like okay so not directly directly the numbers like 1 2 3 4 5 so 1 2 3 4 representation is different and…
The Admin: what we do right after tokeniz we have them ID we anyways are doing
Siva Ajjapu: so something sorry Yeah.
The Admin: Okay, there is no way to send 1 2 3 4 to a computer.
The Admin: So, LLM also works the same thing, You cannot say one to a computer. that, It has to be finally converted to something else that a computer can understand. So, there Here we have a float binary for example 0 1 1 0 0 1 1 4. But in two floating how many numbers can represent into floats whole universe right 0.01
The Admin: 0 1 0 1 0 1 0 0 1 and So floats are very expressive.
Siva Ajjapu: …
The Admin: Okay, it please ask at the end of the question.
Siva Ajjapu: but that fatality rate we can't even calculate for that or do we able to calculate the fatality rate based on some number number system not my question is okay okay Okay. Okay.
The Admin: I think I've not understood your question. Hear it.
rohit fattepur: Rohan for the question languages…
rohit fattepur: where we do not have a lip right let's say korgi or tulu or something so do they support that language or we need to write it in some language and then they later support Thank you.
The Admin: The last I heard UTF8 has support for every single language. If there are languages that are not supported by UTF8 then we cannot support them. So maybe you can check whether Tulu and other languages are supporting UTF8. Okay. All right.
The Admin: Let's look at the algorithm that actually does this step. And the main algorithm here is called bite pair encoding. we will go slightly deep into it and we'll see a variant of this which is called sentence piece which is also used by Bite pair is used by openi. We are going to be sticking to bite pair encoding. you can ask why to yourself. I don't know why but we will. So how does the algorithm work? How do we actually figure out these tokens and subvers and other stuff? Now we have to figure out a rule in which we'll go through the whole data set. even before I look at the algorithm, the first step is to collect What is the data The whole internet let's say we have collected and we have tagged them. We don't even need to tag them.
01:40:00
The Admin: By the way, if you know that you have collected all languages and they are in a folder. If you are not sure of that, then you have to come up with the statistics yourself. You have to calculate the total number of words in English, Hindi and so on and so Collect more datas and feed in. That's what we did when we were making our tokenizer in the last course. So let us say we have a folder in which all the words are there and there Let us say we have 100,000 Wikipedia articles on English, Hindi, Sanskrit, Udu, Spanish, Japanese and other languages. That is where we start with. That's the first thing we have to do. Once we have done that, now we have to have a rule in which Look at all the words that are there and come up with a strategy of creating the subwords. What is that strategy? So, first we're going to start from the characters. We're going to look at every single character that we have in all the words one by one.
The Admin: Then we're going to count the adjacent pairs. What is the character coming next to it? Then we're going to merge the winner. Then we're going to record the word a merge. And then we're going to repeat. Not easy to understand. That's why we're going to go step by step. There's a way to understand this table. Here I'm seeing low into five. That means I found the word low five times in my data set. So when I say the cats at and on the mat, the is coming twice there. So that is what this x into 5 means. Lower came twice. wider came once. Is this part clear? A small data set on which we are building this tokenizer had coming two times, newer coming wider coming once. And look at the effect of less number of words for lowest, newer and wider on the final tokenizer. And should answer a lot of questions you already have. So what is the first thing we're going to do?
The Admin: First thing is going to be that we're going to list down all of them and we're also going to mention how many times they came in. Okay, we going to now look at the two alphabet that are coming close are coming next to each other. here you and we are going to count them, So if I play the next thing you're going to see that low is something that came together and low came two times here and one here. Are we clear? Okay, what is the first thing we have done? We have listed low, lowest, newer, wider and we listed on all the two characters are coming together. So, L O came together, O came together, E R came together, WE came together, then we have D, E came together, then we have E S came together. So, we list down all of them.
The Admin: first step and this is going to work on a cluster of computers so it's going to be extremely fast we don't have to worry about it when this happens as the first step then what we do we look at how many times l came here once but there are five of them so there are five times there and then two here and then one here that's why 5 + 2 + 1 8 you're seeing eight here and then also l and ow you can say ow also came eight times then why are we
The Admin: taking L first just because alphabetically L was before O that's how it will work right so next step is we're going to combine Lo that's the first step that we have done any question till now what is the first step take all the data set we have English maths everything put together look at all the alphabets we have in the data set look at what are the alphabets that are coming to it and then come up with the statistics which tells us how many times that combination of two characters came together. Okay. S. Okay.
The Admin: So next step, LO came together. Now we have L W, right? So not only we and on the bottom by the way, you're going to see that our L is I want to reduce it this much. Yes, I want to go back. Okay, I want you to look at vocabulary Very important. Okay, so previous step we have D E I L N O R S T W as a vocabulary. We're clear on this. That covers all the alphabets we are seeing on the newer, wider. The alphabets used to represent all of that are represented here. D E I L N O R S TW. First step, we list down We look at what the next alphabets coming next to it. And we statistically calculate how many times they are there in the words that are found in data set because low came five times and low sounds like an interesting word important word for this data set.
01:45:00
The Admin: Which means if I don't see bioluminescence enough, I will never be able to create a single tokenizer for bioluminence. If I don't see Titan enough, if I don't see Tata enough in the data set, I will not be able to make a TA as a tokenizer. If I don't see BA enough, the BA is not going to be in the tokenizer. I'll have to represent it in more tokens. If I don't see companies can keep on thinking AMOLED and other stuff. Okay, let us actually look at a tokenizer. So I'm trying to find yes so tick token is an app by openai where you can go and actually write stuff and I'm going to be using a legacy one just to explain. So this is where I'm going to write let's say Tesla how many tokens I use for Tesla one.
The Admin: the data set they use in GPT3 2024 so old times there are also new collecting data sets Tesla but one token but look at how many tokens we have for vi three tokens just to say villa the model has to run thrice because the data set doesn't have it now do they have it two still don't have bill is still not a token can you imagine what other company can you think of let's look at two tokens such a big company billion dollar revenue new every month.
The Admin: GST is one token and GST it will learn of course earlier it was two now has made GST so popular that now it is one token for open also what other thing can you think of let us use some name Sur tokens sorry ma'am earlier three tokens only let us use a E N key ha Akancha you have four tokens how I am also four tokens. Then Ram. We have three tokens there. Let's look at English words. Elon two ken Smith George we have one token. Then let us say we have gates two tokens there. Right?
The Admin: you'll see that on average we have less number of tokens for English but way more tokens for any Hindi structure that we have that's the representation of from the data coming in now we've done the first one moment we do our first pause okay so we started with d e i l n o r s moment we take our first step l is there l and o r is thrown away and they're combined together I may
The Admin: them as alphabet separately but this is to look at the vocabulary that we are maintaining right next is how many times l came in so we have replaced that now you'll see l came eight times so you'll see I wanted to look what happens here next step is l my vocabulary now is d e i l w n r s and I challenge you to prove that I cannot represent anything that is mentioned here with this vocabulary You can represent everything that is there, Let's take the next step. Okay, you tell me What do you think the next step should be? What do you think is the highest count right?
Pratik Pathak: Wing.
The Admin: So you can see E R is coming four times. So here what we should see E and R coming together and these will be clubed together. So let's see the next step. You'll see E R E R and E. So we have to replace data set also by the way right take the data set look at the alphabets combine them replace everywhere in a data set so it's a expensive exercise all language we have to keep on replacing this in a data set otherwise we will not be able to calculate every time which is expensive what is the next one we see L and E are coming twice because was not found in a data set that many times that could actually clear a cutff so now we have lower as a
The Admin: So we have low lower D E R I N S T W. Next step done. So our final data set This is our final. This is how the BP algorithm works. will a Hindi word is going to be completely available as a token depends on the total number of times that word was there in the data set. That's why when someone asked that if I use a total number of words same as all the languages and try enter in a BP algorithm on top or create tokeniz on top will I get similar fatility no because you have to make sure that that word comes enough in English for example the comes a lot let's see control fg how many times is there on this page has 458 time the right so there are some words that are just dominant and they are automatically going to be
01:50:00
The Admin: In fact, if you see they're showing. Perfect. Look at the token ID. That is also very important. Let us look the is N is at 6273. Where is smaller the ID in general that means that it has a high frequency. It was found very very early on. Can you come up with anything else that may have even lower small cats might be there. Re for example or A is going to be A B C. All of these are covered initially only. So S and so Come up with two. So let's say T and Y 1206. Let's look at R E 264. Come up with a threeletter word that may be in thousand maybe red. No.
Pratik Pathak: again.
The Admin: And yes right so this should give you some idea when we are looking at this BP algorithm this ID number is basically how fast it was formed and let's look at a word which came later on but signs one token look at the token ID 1 3 4186 right and we are looking at GPD5 here it has a 250 200,000 or 2502,000 tokenizer so somewhere in the middle there's so
The Admin: new and one token by the way. Do you understand how bad is then? B I R L A. another thing that you need to know. Egg here I've added a space are two different Egg egg one token, right? So BP algorithm has to play with this also. So egg has two tokens dedicated to it. BA doesn't right That's how us decides that we have fable and other excess. these are the reason you should feel substandard as a human not because Bangalore roads are bad. They're bad but Anyways I hope you get some idea of how the tokenizer works or the BP works. Okay. Any question just on the BP?
The Admin: After that we'll discuss another strategy which is called u sentence piece which is a slightly different way of looking at it. Okay Ashish I did not get the question.
Ashish Tiwari: Does it consider the position of the letters as well? A word would it also consider eer there or does it consider only at the end of the word?
The Admin: We had es also there right?
Ashish Tiwari: For example,…
The Admin: Doesn't matter.
Ashish Tiwari: er is at the last position. So lower new or let's say we had Erica. So it doesn't matter consider as group. God.
The Admin: We just look at two consecutive algorithm.
Chandrahaas Jasti: So you mentioned if you don't CC a particular word for enough number of times you won't have a token for that particular word. So how do you decide this enough threshold?
The Admin: Basically when you're running this you're going to decide that I want to have 000 tokens means that right at least 100,000 should be there. So if there are words which are more often 000 times there…
The Admin: if there are 100,000 words that are more often than the word you're targeting then it's not going to be there So yeah, one way of looking at it such …
Chandrahaas Jasti: We won't have the token.
Sachin Bharadwaj: How do you encode emojis? let's say emojis
The Admin: UTF. Every emoji has a UTF. So if you go here and if I go here and if I write this, so it has a UTF number for it.
Sachin Bharadwaj: And in this example, when we combine the highest frequency words characters in this case, but you will still keep L O individual characters in the set, right? To prevent U and…
The Admin: Yeah. Yes,…
Sachin Bharadwaj: K. Okay.
The Admin: that we do Here I'm not showing but we do. Okay. Sh.
shivam kumar: So do we have a mapping for spaces and other stop words as well.
01:55:00
The Admin: We have without space low capital L low so all of the variants are there in data set go ahead sorry
Vardhan Walavalkar: So yeah ro if there's a word which is not there in the vocabulary and there is more than one way to split it into subwords for example gates we saw that it is split into g and h versus gate and s. So is there an algorithm or…
Vardhan Walavalkar: what is the logic behind fitting them?
The Admin: No, no.
The Admin: If you have a sub word that makes a word that was not in the vocabulary while training, it's fine because we have the subord to make it while we convert the text into tokens.
Vardhan Walavalkar: Okay. My question was gates is not in the vocabulary.
The Admin: The algorithm.
Vardhan Walavalkar: So we have to split into two sub words which are there in the vocabulary right in our So how do you do that? you can do it two ways. Gate NS or GN8 strip.
The Admin: So when we are working on it the algorithm gets generated. What is the first thing we do? So the way we are making the tokenizer is the way we encode also. So we start with low we then find we have W also then we see we have So final is going to be this.
Vardhan Walavalkar: Okay. Okay.
The Admin: Got it? So it has to go through the sequence of algorithm the way we generated it also.
The Admin: So this is called ordered merge list. That is how we are going to proceed. so every word has a order basically every word becomes al algorithm.
The Admin: How do we encode it? so L was using…
Subramanya Naik: Yeah. in the first step I can see top two have the same frequency.
Subramanya Naik: If you Yeah.
The Admin: because L comes before O. M L O alphabetical I just said L alphabetically comes before O that's…
Subramanya Naik: Even OW had a same frequency, So the algorithm is going to pick always the top one or does it go parallelly? okay.
The Admin: why L O it right your parents lied to you when they said that they love you and…
Subramanya Naik: Got it.
The Admin: your brother or sister equally
Subramanya Naik: Okay. Yeah.
Umesh Nmenon: Sir, is there any significance of the token ID itself?
The Admin: Yes and…
The Admin: yes, no for rest of the world. by why yes for us we have to go to the embedding session. We're going to be using that as a logic. So that was used for by us to figure out the right scheme in which we introduce the indic tokens. So answer is yes we will use it but we're going to cover that in future…
The Admin: but it gives you sort of an idea how many times that word was seen. So that inference you can say nothing we can control it and…
Umesh Nmenon: But we cannot control that right.
Umesh Nmenon: It's purely based upon the data and how many times it Okay.
The Admin: that's what we did in Braic tokenizer. We sorted the whole thing because we wanted to do something special.
The Admin: Nathan fast.
NITIN YADAV: Yeah. Yeah. Rohan, so you mentioned that we have to predecide the number of tokens which we are going to use. So is it dependent on the cost or any other parameter? Okay.
The Admin: Everything goes to Nathan. Nothing. Yes.
nagapavankumar kalepu: Yeah, this question is specifically in India. So as you mentioned the bera is representing more tokens and so that means if we use more Indian context that means we are paying more cost for cost to these US and other country based LLMs. Is that correct understanding? Okay. Is that good? Yeah.
The Admin: And it's a very very important realization that I want all of you to have.
The Admin: Not only you're paying more because you're paying in dollars, you're also paying more just because berilla is not a word but Tesla is right it's something and that's why I'm saying tokenizer is the heart of everything when Indian government says that so LLM blah blah blah not training a tokenizer in Indian context is the cost that we are facing Tata for example even Tata such a Small word does not have a fixed tokenizer for it. Space data may have but look at where it came 0162 which means that if a word had this where it started at the first word you have to pay it twice for it. Nathan Kim
Khemraj rathore: So in the final vocabulary in our example, so we have low, as well as So now when we come across lower as a word,…
Khemraj rathore: so how we will pick it up? I mean we have lower as well. But you said that when we will be running it through the algorithm in that case.
02:00:00
The Admin: We have to alm don't look at algorithm look at me.
The Admin: So lower came in. Algorithm is going to say okay what is the first character L. What is the second character? O have I found it is there in my vocabulary.
Khemraj rathore: No. Yes.
The Admin: No it's not there. Okay what is the next one? W is W there in my vocabulary? Yes, it is there. So, it will add low there. Then it's going to say E. Okay, what is the next word? R E R is there in my vocabulary. E R S is there. So, we're going to put L O W and E R. Then we're going to say whole word is there. So, we start in reverse. Is the word there?
The Admin: Sign it.
Khemraj rathore: Okay.
Khemraj rathore: Got it. So, we'll go to the end. If you find it at end and then that's good.
The Admin: Correct. Right.
Khemraj rathore: Okay. Thanks.
The Admin: So, This is for the lowest. For example, if you only found L.
The Admin: EST couldn't combine okay that is exactly u linking to the question other student asked that has frequency any meaning here and…
Syed Abdul: No, that was my question like during inference time or during actual time how it
suresh kumar: at what point would you start removing the words because you want to save on tokens. So in that case Got it.
The Admin: my interpretation was this frequency has a big meaning here. So for me if I sort the tokenizer in a frequency order and then look at the lower frequency tokens that are used by let's say open AI and then are they relevant for Indian context if they're not I'm just going to throw them away and use them for things that are for Indian context.
suresh kumar: Thank you.
The Admin: So there are things that you can do of manipulation and that's what that bic tokenizer paper was for everything needs to be determined.
Rishikesh Kumar: Yeah Rohan. So one question I have is this BP is very static analyzer. do we have something like context analyzer also because based on the context of the word it can create tokens like a context will not come into picture.
The Admin: istic before we start training there is no context but that comes in the model moment you say context something nondeterministic has to be a
Rishikesh Kumar: Is it possible that this tokenization will be done by LLM itself means we should not use tokenization at all means we pass all the words and it will gather the meaning and then It will create token by itself. Is that okay? Okay.
The Admin: No, because there has to be a way of feeding it. So a way is going to be Text can be characters or words both failed. So sub token became the only option we had.
Umesh Nmenon: Yeah. So Rohan,…
Umesh Nmenon: if the frequency of L and Lu they are same then L will be replaced by L.
The Admin: That's correct.
Umesh Nmenon: One second.
The Admin: Ome frequency only frequency that is…
sonu agarwal: So also this merging is completely dependent on the frequency or any other part also play I mean availability the common basically low is there in the dictionary so only frequency
The Admin: why putting Tata those many times as Tesla in the data set is important Okay. you can.
Syed Abdul: Can I cheat and for example you said the frequency but if my vocabulary size is 100 I would go until 80 and then add manually 20 words like bilata because I don't have the training data set but I want them in the building.
The Admin: Yes, you can.
Syed Abdul: Because during the training it will just see that goila was there and…
The Admin: Not but remember that you have to. Yeah, you can easily add.
The Admin: Yes, corrected…
Syed Abdul: we'll just pick it up.
The Admin: but also not that I'm answer is no.
Shubham Saxena: So when we have two words which are space separated and we want them as a single token would there be a way for example like New Delhi. So they will always come together and it has a meaning.
The Admin: It's a waste basically because it's stored there. New Delhi may come again depends on how big your context is but never done
Ambrish Gupta: Yeah. …
Ambrish Gupta: all the tokens will be there when we are looking Tata will be also there. But when you're putting a space tata, then it's become a proper noun. when you put without space then it will be tata the mid word that's…
Ambrish Gupta: why it will be coming in a different locations and same with the alen also alen tesla everything so Tesla is here without sp now…
The Admin: Correct. No,…
The Admin: Tesla is the here without Yes.
02:05:00
Ambrish Gupta: if you give the space this mean that so this la is coming as a part of this Tesla meaning is a proper name proper noun or starting with the new word when we put without space it it's a inner word.
The Admin: You can get word of a sentence also.
Ambrish Gupta: So inner sorry no…
The Admin: can be first word of a sentence.
Ambrish Gupta: because if the first word of sentence then during the BP algorithm creation it will take one keyword let's say space and then Tesla will be different that's…
The Admin: No, no. If Tesla is the first word of a sentence, there is no space before it.
Ambrish Gupta: that's why you're getting the two different token one way so let's say take the builder example in the BA example without a space okay so this is saying that bill is a part of the mid word it mean let's say something is ahead of billah as well now…
The Admin: That is correct.
Ambrish Gupta: if we take the baha with a space it mean that bila is a company name or a proper noun so billa is starting with the space which mean a proper noun ba is without space saying that it when is a part of mid word it will be taken as a different organization study So…
Ambrish Gupta: if you put the start if you can put the space ahead of the builder and…
The Admin: Yeah. I have no clue…
Ambrish Gupta: this just try with tata because there's a proper noun and breakage will be depending upon where the word is starting is the word is a part of the middle word or it has a space initially itself. No, I'm not saying middle of the sentence.
The Admin: what I trying to explain. Based on where the word was found, these tokens are made. So Tesla, Bella, all a first word. They can come a noun as something in the middle of the sentence.
The Admin: But the frequency middle of the word.
Ambrish Gupta: I'm saying there the middle of the word. Yeah.
The Admin: How will Tesla ever come as a Middle of a will mean Tesla.
Ambrish Gupta: 
Ambrish Gupta: Something like that. In this case it will be having a different …
The Admin: Of course, it will have a different strategy. But here you can see it's not broken as Tesla. It really again depends. R is going to be way more compared to Tesla is correct.
Ambrish Gupta: because test spelling is wrong here. Okay. Sure.
The Admin: BP algorithm is Okay. I'll wait after the session.
The Admin: fail purely based on frequency.
Suhail Gupta: Rowan, so do we define the degree at what depth we can merge the characters or it is purely based on the frequency and the vocabulary?
The Admin: example, let's come up with a big word ation words experiment one word or…
The Admin: three word frequency only. Which other word is long and…
Shishir Maharaj: That's it.
The Admin: you can think two. Okay. Good.
Suhail Gupta: Yeah, got it.
Suhail Gupta: Thank you.
The Admin: So this is still two words. Okay. Last question.
Dattatreya Manjunath: Yeah.
Dattatreya Manjunath: So when we have a list of encoding let's say tokens right are we always going to given a sentence while tokenizing are we just going to be greedy about it or…
Shishir Maharaj: I got you.
The Admin: Yeah. No,…
Dattatreya Manjunath: are we going to consider the whole sentence and try to minimize the number of tokens?
Shishir Maharaj: What do you
The Admin: Greedy. We do not have a sentencebased algorithm. We always have a word based algorithm.
The Admin: So there's no way to come up with any other strategy.
Dattatreya Manjunath: So what I mean is let's say we have XYZ ABC something like that and…
Dattatreya Manjunath: let's say we have a token for XY and…
Dattatreya Manjunath: we have token for Z ABC right so that will be two tokens and we have let's say Yeah,…
The Admin: The answer is no.
The Admin: In the BP strategy, no. everything is deterministic moment the algorithm is done. Can we have it? You can come up with something but not there in the sort of state state of the algorithms.
Dattatreya Manjunath: I read something. the other.
The Admin: Moving on. Sorry, I'll come back to Kim Raj and Swish in some time. Now BP algorithm has some other variants also and these variants we do need to look at. Now we have oneplus okay and these examples I couldn't come up with better examples but just look at what this example does comes together 100 times. So we have a data set in which one because we were talking about mobile phones came 100 times together.
02:10:00
The Admin: The one token came thousand times because one is used a lot of times also one play one game one day and so on plus also came thousand times lot of times. So when we are looking at BP algorithm the way it calculates internally we have not looked at the frequency and other calculations it does something like this 100 divide by,000 plus,000 okay and that becomes 0.001. So this kind of BP algorithm is called a word piece. Now we have I and pod. I came 40 times. The left token I individually came 45 times and the right token came Pod also came 50 times. here we have 40 divid by 45 into 50 which is 0.0178. Right?
The Admin: So here we're looking at a word piece code which is another algorithm which uses frequency to decide which comes together which doesn't. Now BP is going to be picking the frequent based on how many times these two things came together. We saw that right? So it is sort of doing something like this. Whereas in wordpiece we're going to see that not only these two tokens came together 40 times these two individually they don't occur so much apart from in this right so if there are tokens or subtokens or these combinations that exist only to make that word the combination is made that's the word piece algorithm slightly different variant
The Admin: If you start thinking about it will start answering some of the question you are also asking that okay I see ta and t coming a lot of times together what if I merge them because they only exist to come together something like that right so in that case another algorithm we have is called word piece which essentially combines them together we're not going to be using it the way I pick algorithm is by looking at sort what is the state-of-the-art BP is the state-of-the-art used by anthropic used by openai Google uses sentence piece which is slightly different now sentence It's not a third merge rule like BPO word piece is completely different. when we were talking about these words here when we were looking at word lower and lowest we were using them with a space as a delimiter. This is going to S's question right? We're using each word separately. So a separate word increase is a separate word. Google says no I will consider this as a separate word.
The Admin: space included the space likelihood right so when we're talking about sentence piece the cat is going to be and space cat sorry the cat is going to be separate tokens for our BP but in case of sentence piece the will also have a space before it and cat this is how they are going to represent it right so slightly different algorithm compared to what BP does so in case of BP we emerge the most frequent pairs in place of wordp piece we merged most frequent pairs if those individual elements were also less infrequent right so those things that we're merging itself came very less basically right so those things exist just to make that word sentence piece says that I'm going to take a token but I'm going to consider space before it also a part of it and then it's sort of BP there are three different algorithms that are there we're going to be sticking to BP okay so
sonu agarwal: How does this help and what is the additional benefit we get out from this? because they're multiple techniques. But what is the actual benefit and why we're doing that?
The Admin: Wordpie nobody uses anymore…
The Admin: because it doesn't have any benefit. DP is used by OpenAI and anthropic because they love it. Google always tend to come up with something else and they stick to it because you invented it, you are sticking with it. That's why sentence piece exists only with the Google thing and they're very close to each other.
The Admin: there's no benefit of one over the other.
The Admin: The performance is same and you can actually see Gemini has never beaten any benchmark compared to other algorithms. So I don't think that it is good enough to compare with BP. But because for example if you're working in buying an iPhone going to Samsung office will be a bad idea. Something like that slight var will keep on happening in the labs.
sonu agarwal: So the new models like opus and…
sonu agarwal: everything is coming out. So they're not exactly mentioning what kind of tokenizer they using. So they are still using BP some variance or some Okay.
The Admin: they will not release it but it's not something piece and we get some idea because we do get tokens back also so we see we are getting a space token or…
The Admin: we're getting the token and space separately so we can immedately figure out it's in this piece of VPA say is kept we saw here right tokenizer We have Tesla as a single token.
Syed Abdul: Yeah. So in BP…
Syed Abdul: how is the space handled? for example we showed that we break by space but in the titanizer we saw that and space have different ids. Yeah. So,…
02:15:00
The Admin: We also have a space Tesla as a separate token. So we see it is coming separately or it's coming with space. We add both of them.
Syed Abdul: but in the actual when creating the tokenizer, we separate the corpus by spaces and have the words and then count, right? …
The Admin: A space is also going to be a part here. Imagine that we had a space mentioned here.
Syed Abdul: Just like in that sentence cat space those words are also added in the corpus by counting.
The Admin: Here space is a part of vocabulary.
The Admin: Based on the frequencies gets So sentence forces it to be the space word in DP it comes naturally.
Syed Abdul: So space and t is also kind of combination there then.
The Admin: Yes. If it comes naturally.
Syed Abdul: Yeah. If it comes naturally by frequency.
The Admin: If it comes naturally by frequency. Yes. Anesh have sometimes it will one token sometimes may
Gitesh Grover: So do we also consider punctuations like quotes or commas in the vocabulary or is it just space that is given preference?
The Admin: No,…
Rishikesh Kumar: Yeah. So this BP will work on data sets. We are running this algorithm. So once we decide the token we start training and in between suppose if we get new data set will we update the token or…
The Admin: that's not how the algorithms are prepared. First, we have to collect a data set. So, After that data set we're talking about a 50 trillion there is no data set left after that. If you're talking lab scale you have to start from scratch.
Rishikesh Kumar: okay but if we get new data set after that then again have to define and regarding that token free that I was talking about that we can pass all the text in bite code. No means 00 1 0. We don't need tokens for that. We'll just pass the …
The Admin: that becomes a character base. We just discuss it's useless to the end of session.
Rishikesh Kumar: why it's useless means if it goes through all the transformer block it can find patterns and…
The Admin: I've explained the character…
The Admin: why character encoding is really bad multiple times now. We'll not spend time on it. no no no no I'll phrase it properly for you.
Rishikesh Kumar: Okay.
abhishek Kumar: Yeah, Rohan. is BP helping us in reducing the vocabulary? We need to represent the same sentence. Mhm.
The Admin: Reduce the vocabulary. DP is helping us represent all the words that exist in the world in a fixed number of vocabulary.
The Admin: There's a difference, There are words that PP cannot make.
abhishek Kumar: Okay. Mhm.
The Admin: For example, t I don't know why it will be used but let's say on is a word right when we say it is reduce the vocabulary of what it is helping us reduce the total number of tokens that can represent everything in the world right for example is two…
abhishek Kumar: Yeah. Yep.
The Admin: but bp is allowing us to still mention that…
abhishek Kumar: Yeah. Yeah.
The Admin: if I were to follow…
The Admin: what you are saying then I can make a token that has ba as a single token which means every single word halyam buja and everything we can think
The Admin: Is there in the dictionary? Not possible. Okay. Yes.
abhishek Kumar: Okay. But…
abhishek Kumar: but it does help us in identifying more frequently or less frequently but important ones something like that.
The Admin: And another thing I want you to remember artificial intelligence changing the word.
The Admin: How many? 1 2 3 4 5 6 right? 8 by six. This number will never be less than one. Just think about it. Right. Yes. Okay.
abhishek Kumar: Yeah. Yeah. Okay.
Balaji Chunduri: So now the BP tries to look for a word if it can't find word then subword and characters of a word right and suppose if we make a spelling mistake so it consumes more tokens than using the right word when we are searching for tokens. Thank you. That's my question.
The Admin: BP is what I want you to remember but word piece just keep in mind the combination is not done by the frequency of how many times it found the main difference in BP and Word Exactly same algorithms in BP we look at how many times you found it right in wordpiece we see how many times you found it. Fair enough. But the subwords which are getting combined to make that next tokenizer how many times If these are found less number of times which means that they only exist to make the better word. That's where the word piece comes in but it fails in front of BPA because BPA naturally looks at the frequency let's look at the vocabulary size which is a very very big target for us. I mentioned yours but I'm not really sure this is the number we're going to go ahead with again or not.
02:20:00
The Admin: 4K is a very small number of data set very less number of tokens and 4K and if you see 16 here some numbers are changing here. So I wanted to look at what are the numbers that are changing and let me reduce it. So yes so let's go with four now 4K for a tiny model is Okay, for a small model 4K sounds okay and that means that it's not even English model. It's something that you are just trying and testing it out.
The Admin: If you have 4K this approximation by the way to represent thousand words I'll have to use something like 1622 words and we are only focusing on English other languages are not here okay if I go with 256 you're going to see that I use less number of tokens and it can be large model also this doesn't change let's go with the highest model one trillion parameter model and only focus on sequence length as our vocabulary is increasing you can see our sequence length is reducing Is this clear? why sequence length reducing? Because r is a word. I don't have to use ber and last separately. Right? It will come only once. But I also want you to notice here it is Here it is 1,400. Sort of a jump of 150 200ish from 1400 to 64. Four times of vocabulary.
The Admin: Look at the reduction, 1400 becomes 3050, So now less than 100 reduction 64 to 131k you can see barely any reduction 40 reduction and from 131 double we have just double vocabulary but look at reduction 1310 becomes 1276 not even 15 So there's a diminishing return as we keep on increasing vocabulary. Yes, Berla is going to be one token, but if US is using it, why would US even want to discuss about Berla as much as they want to discuss about Tesla that Twitter is full of Tesla or Donald Trump and things they are worried about in India? Of course, we are going to pay, but for us, which is what they designed for, they're not going to be cons consider concerning about this first thing, right? So, there's a diminishing return based on how many times a token actually comes in the data set or how many times you actually talk about it.
The Admin: It's okay nationally I say that imagine data is also a two token for data set but the actual question as a scientist or a company deploying the model that they need to answer is how many times that token will actually used by the user. look at the size of embedding table here we assuming 8,96 as the embedding dimension token let's say Tesla will be some order list. if you go back here and I write te s the token ID here is going to be 181412 so I will go in that embedding table I'll go at 18142 whatever that ID is and that is going to be assigned 8,000 not basic 8,96 floating dimensions right that number this number also determines the capacity of the model the bigger it is it can have
The Admin: more context for that word, We'll come back to that later on. But Smaller the model, you'll see that number is drop dropping. 512 1024 2048 40 496 in Excel. Big big one, right? we probably will be somewhere around here when we train it because we don we don't have $100 million to train a model, right? This is now reaching a 20 $30 million kind of capacity. So let's fix it to Excel and look at the size of the embedding table. This is and let me untie it. I'll explain what untying means. Look at the size of the embedding table. So 4K 4,000 into 8,000 is 66 Very small embedding table. The first layer of the neural network and the last layer of the neural network. For small models, we can tie them. We can make them same. What does it mean? We'll discuss later on. 16K 256 still 64K. Now we're hitting a one billion parameter only for the input and one for the output.
The Admin: till this level you can possibly tie it but moment you're at a higher vocabulary also means a bigger model tying is a bad idea right so we have 2.12 GB or billion parameters just for the input and output exactly same so four billion parameters in your model are only for the input and processing output when you go to 256 4 2.48 48 total sorry right four 4.24 billion parameters are there for input and output combined here we have 2.2
The Admin: I read this separately, So this is how the things change on model size. look at here because of look at this table for a small model. Let's say we pick a 4K and we have Excel which is embedding very high. You'll see where the parameters go very few 66 MB compared to the model size is nothing. But moment we go to a bigger model, you're going to see that it starts eating up the overall parameter we have If you go for the base model, you're going to see half of the parameters are just the input dimensions. And let me give you a concrete example. We have a gamma 4. let's look at size. I don't know how much of that they So this is gamma for E4 model. Here we have vocabulary size as how much? 262K.
02:25:00
The Admin: And I don't know dimension they have not mentioned. So let me go to charg what's the foot size and model dimension. You saw how many parameters it had It had 31 billion parameters. so 31 billion divide by I don't know it become billion or not so let me wait for but 252k so at least I can write this these are a total number of tokens in the vocab for kma
The Admin: So model dimension dense we looked at total dimension model I don't want D model. Yeah something like this it is answering itself. So here we have around 1.5 billion parameters. So we have into two 3 billion parameters. One for input one for output. And this is for a 31 billion parameter model. So 31 divid by 31id by 3. So around 10%. Sounds good. Yes or Immediately hands up or down. You understood this part. 3 billion parameters in the gamma 31b model are just for embedding tables. Wait, let me go to now. Ola.
The Admin: PMA and let's look at 30 PMA 31B. Look what changes. This is the 31B model. This model is going to be coming in multiple variants. We have 41B blah blah blah. And when I download this, I am going to get Where is GGF? Yes. Do you see this 20? So there are quantizations that are possible, So when I'm running on my system, I have a run. So Ola is something that you can use to launch these models on your computer. There we have 20 billion embedding table and output table cannot be contized. So there 20 divid by three what happened?
The Admin: Sorry 3 divid by 20 3ide by 20 around 15%. Right? And if we were looking at even more compression which is for other models let me go for gamma 4. We have other kinds of models also. Here are the models size gamma 4 latest 9.6 in 9.6 3 billion are still the parameters for the input and output. So And if you go down 50% parameters for gamma 4 E2B mix are still the input and That's the effect. You cannot compress input and outut embedding layers. Are we clear on this? So when I said that particular line that you decide once and you pay for every single time is literally forever.
The Admin: So you can't even compress it because I'll say this is a layer where everything is actually stored. So you cannot compress It's a very small note on the embedding. we just discussed the total number of tokens that we have that is called a token cap this number and how does it affect you seeing this 2048 right so tiny small medium large excel this number 8096 is what we're going to discuss later on that is called embedding what is the dimension of embedding now we wanted to go with 131072 into 4096 right so we wanted to go with this embedding 4096 was
02:30:00
The Admin: dimension of our model and that meant input half a billion parameter at the output right let's focus only on the input side half a billion parameter so chronicer embedding is I say our own innovation where this number becomes something like three around 3 million that
The Admin: So we're going to discuss how that possible. We came up with a strategy where we can actually somehow convert this whole thing into deterministic embedding table still using 131,000 token. But instead of spending half a billion had we gone ahead with let's say 8K as embedding layer you would have to spend around 1 billion just on the input parameters we compress that into something like here for around 3 million and we're going to cover that in seventh session called chronograph factorization. more detail on the Hindi one and from there we're going to jump to assignment. So that should be easy. So index deep dive. I want to look at these words and tell me you understand what is happening. How many of you can read Hindi? I don't know. I wrote Hindi because I can read it and show it to you at least. So this is that same thing I was talking about.
The Admin: Ka and there's a halant or a vir at the bottom which means we have taken the wall away and sha that becomes a new character called sha right there's a sha then we have ta and ra if we take the matra away become tra again we have ja and ya yagna soya right then we have sha and ra that is sha so that's how we make these indicators now look at this ka if you add sha right and then if it becomes sha. So this is how Indian languages work. this thing the halen part is represented by this guy when we are actually sending it on computer it is represented like this matters for tokenizer. If you're building a tokenizer for indic languages and it doesn't know where to break the word because you can see we are looking at characters right we look at the characters and represent the next character next to it.
The Admin: If we don't consider these then we're going to end up breaking words in between where it was wrong to break. That's why the tokenizer the BP algorithm has to be modified for Indian languages. That is also something that is super important. Look at this shi we have adaka and then we have ta and then we have e but we don't have the consonant for that right? So that is also different. So we have to merge that and that is how this is represented. So here what are we saying? We have T but we have half of it right. So for the car then I had one more example. This is JWT which is called zero width joiner and there is JW NJ which is zero width no joiner. What does it mean? Look at This called and sha becomes sha. So this is represented like this in UTF.
The Admin: So when you're writing just this into computer internally it is saved like car then we have half of it so we take the wall part away then we have zero with non-joiner and then this is a special character that has to be introduced in the encoding itself and for example this requests that consonants remain visually separate right you're not merging them the helen may remain visible after the joining
The Admin: SH leg but if you're using something like ZWT then we have K and Adasha and then J zero with joiner and then becomes this look at the differences both both are exactly same are you clear on this there are two ways of writing and then there is this all three read exactly the same I know this is going slightly deeper I just want to tell
The Admin: that this happens in Indic languages. There are three ways of writing exactly the same thing, So you have sha shash and there's no other way to read Exactly the same pron same usage. So the way we represent it is like this uni code had to come up with a different strategy for that and that's what we have this JWT and JWJ. So when we write our algorithm later on we're going to focus on that. This is just representing that in Dagari which I can read Telugu Bengali I can't and I can't. So same things mentioned here. what is your assignment? By the way, we have minor part also. So, don't jump after out of the assignment. Your assignment is I want you to pick Hindi, English, Telugu, and one of your own language. And that's why I'm leaving one language to your own choice. cannot be English. So, pick your own language. So, you have four languages.
02:35:00
The Admin: Ask your AI agent to design a BB tokenizer because don't know the algorithm and you will claim I don't know blah blah blah how do I clean it so use your agent okay let's see your agent can do it or not so ask your agent to design a BP tokenizer such that 10,000 is your token vocabulary. Are we clear on this? Just raise your hand so I know that you're listening and you're not dozing off. Your maximum vocabulary is 10,000. All right. Second, total English vocabulary, let's say 5, I'm explaining something. So, let us say your English vocabulary is 5,000. Okay. Let me start from scratch. Your assignment is to go to Wikipedia, download the page on India, in English, in Hindi, in Telugu, and in one other language of your choice. You're allowed to cheat by the I'm saying it loudly. You're allowed to cheat. What is cheating?
The Admin: you will figure out you don't need to download English, Hindi, Telugu and one of your own language let's say Punjabi or Uru and download that for page India on Wikipedia after you downloaded that your target is to come up with a BP tokenizer where the vocabulary size is 10,000 point number one okay your English fertility which is how we're calculating it here must be 1.6 6 or less which means the total number of English words in your document after the tokenizer is running on it should have a fertility of 1.6
The Admin: Which means that if your document had 1,000 words, you cannot represent those thousand words in more than 1,600 tokens. Okay, that's the point number one. Let's call this ratio as X1. So your English fertility is X1. Similarly, you need to calculate the fertility for Hindi, Telugu and another language of your choice. Let's call it X3 and X4. Sort English is probably going to be the highest or lowest depending on whether you cheat or not. Sort them out. Let's say your smallest sorry x4 is the largest let's say you picked sanskrit and not enough words for that so we have x3 x1 just a representation now assignment score is going to be 1,000 divided by x4 - x1 so the gap between the worst and the best language is the denominator of your scoreide by th00and what does it means that if
The Admin: to let us say for English you had a 1.6 for Hindi you had 1 9 for Telugu you had 2.2 and for your other language let's say Sanskrit or Canada for example was 3.2 then your assignment score is going to be 1,000 divid by 3.2 minus 1.6 what is this 1,000 divid by 1.6 So your assignment score even before you submit but you have to prove that. So you'll see that you need to make a widget. I need to see your list also what are the in tokenizer and you have some statistics that is there page that you can see. So this is going to be your score. However if somehow magically you can do 1.6 you can do Hindi as 1.66 if you can do Telugu as 1.666 and if you can do let's say the Canada as 1.666 then your score is going to be 1.6.
The Admin: 6 6 - 1.6 going to be So 1,000 / 0.6 is your 06 massive score. let me make my life easy. Let's say this So this is one. your score is going to be 10,000. I promise you I'll give you that one lakh. Your score is going to be determined by how good your BP is. Are we clear on this? So try and do your best. Okay. Any question just on the assignment?
Adinath Auti: No. I don't really have a question right now.
The Admin: Okay, I'm loing all the Any question on assignment?
Soma Korada: Is the intuition going to be that if all four languages have equal spread of words or approximately equal contribution…
Soma Korada: then it's
The Admin: You have open …
The Admin: then you have Gemini ask you love your AI more right as I said that's going to be on the action A widget that shows this ratio token statistics and…
Mukund singh: Yeah, I just wanted to ask what will be the final submission last time we had to submit that app on netly five. So what will be the submission this time?
02:40:00
The Admin: calculation and your self score allows me to I need to see your tokenizer and a URL for the widgets hosted on netlifi. last question on assignment.
The Admin: I did I say you can no no that no so your fertility score is calculated on this only…
sonu agarwal: So suppose the data is related to the English so Hindi and…
sonu agarwal: Uru or whatever version there should be translation of that right but it can't take any other apart from that I mean the trans version of Hindi of English. So you need not exact answer. You can see anything.
The Admin: how do I see here in so your fertility score is calculated on the indic page only
sonu agarwal: Okay.
The Admin: But to make the tokenizer, you can do anything. That's where the cheating comes in. So, you're going to use this page to calculate your fertility score. All of that is more in Okay, Aron. Last question.
Arun Aravind: we'll be downloading these pages and then doing on that okay okay and…
The Admin: Your agent will do Don't worry. It will scan it. If you download, it's going to be HTML. So you have to parse and all that your agent will take care of it cloud and…
Arun Aravind: when you say agent it is like chat GPT cloud and all right Next.
The Admin: all. So that's why I'm not going in it because how do we clean table passing and all of that comes into picture not part of the session that your agent can take care immediately.
The Admin: square correct.
Tejaskumar Reddy J: I'm sorry if I missed a point, but evaluations going to be on the Wikipedia page on India, right? Like I mentioned.
The Admin: Wikipedia page of Hindi, Wikipedia page of Telugu and other languages.
Tejaskumar Reddy J: Okay. Thank
Udit Singhania: Can it be like the fourth language…
Udit Singhania: which you mentioned apart from Hindi, English and Telu. So should it be Indian language or should it be out of India? Okay.
The Admin: you're allowed to make your life difficult.
The Admin: So pick the most comp complex language that defeats the score. I would pick the easiest one which is very close to these languages.
The Admin: All right, last two topics of the day. and this is sort of a continuation of where we left in the remember every session has two parts, the major and the Minor this time is The next session's minor is going to be something on tokenizer because we need to start working on code also very soon, which is going to be the final code that we deploy. again, I'm not going to take you deeper into attention yet, but I still want to explain what is it and how does it work. Now but the first topic I want to discuss with you is the position embedding and what is it and how does it work and other stuff.
The Admin: Here is a very simple data set. The data set requires the model to predict that A B comes before C or C comes or D comes before E or E comes before F. Are we clear? So if you look at this sequence and if you're asking is coming before B answer If you look at this data set if you ask is A coming before B answer is no. Are we clear? It's very simple.
The Admin: I'm going to send a sequence of four characters anyone from A B CDE E F some sequence and we want to predict whether A comes before B or B come before C basically they're in sequence or not that's all now what we're going to do we're going to train a model without adding any position embedding here you can see that I've added a position embedding also the trainable position embedding how do we do it what do we add later on this is just a proof that position emitting is required now we train on this four character sequences
The Admin: both the model one other with position emitting and see what happens without position emitting can't clone that is why position emitting is required right so when we train our text we need to know what came before Tesla suit some company if you don't know the sequence then who sued whom right and she had a horse who fell ill so she went with the car now the car went ill. So the car went ill, so the horse went with the sheet. So we need to know the sequence. It's a very simple example where all we're doing is to basically have these sequences and we are predicting which came afterward. And if you do not add a position embedding cannot train. That is why position embeddings are very very important. Right? So spend some time on this if you have any question position emitting. Now this topic is on What actually attention is?
02:45:00
The Admin: This is a play where a model is predicting the animal cross it moved and so on and so on. first thing is when is there right it goes inside the model and if you remember the architecture from the session one let me open that it's a good time to do that.
The Admin: So what I'm actually doing is breaking down In this transform block, if you remember, we discussed that we have a token and position emitting. Right? The next thing is norm, which I will also cover today. And then we have this KQV. For some reason, each word becomes K, Q and V. So K is called key, Q is called query and V is called value. How do they interact? Again, we will discuss later on. But this is what is happening. We're only focusing on what again today. let me go back Here we have the which is going to internally in the model convert into query key and value. Let's look at the next step. Now the model is going to look at all the words it see. What are the words the can see? Nothing else. Right? It can only see itself because there's no word before it. So the next step is going to be it gives 100% attention to itself. Right?
The Admin: nothing else can happen. What is the next step? It predicts the. So the came in and the is basically going on. So I'm keeping things very simple. However, in the next step I have the animal also. So when we have these three KQVs for the animal, what is the next step? It's going to look at and animal. So it gets some reference and understand the animal. it's talking about me. But is telling me that I am the focus of the sentence. It splits the attention between both of them. And that is how it is able to get higher value for animal here. So it basically gets the attention slightly change toward itself understands more taking some references from the here. This is not the prediction by the way. This is how much importance or how much it's learning from the Attention allows the word to learn from the bank of the road or the inclination like that. Next step we have cross here.
The Admin: So crossed is going to look at itself animal and all the words before So it's going to look at in some other order. It's going to see the animal cross is trying to understand Is the sign cross or it is the So the animal itself is saying animal crossed. and the concept where the animal actually crosses the road. That is what Attention is modifying the embedding of the word. So internally it gets the actual meaning. Apple is the one that we eat is the one that the phones are made for or it's the one that we call small kids the apple of my eye right here also this is shown exactly in the same way the attention gets split and that redefineses the meaning of what the cross actually is same happens because we're going to look at all of them I'm going to say okay the animal cross because what reason am I trying to explain the crossing region of the animal so every word sort of gathers a
The Admin: history of all the words before it because of the attention and try to understand the meaning of my word is what do I really stand for he was a tiger on a field right he was a tiger on a field and all the players of opposing our cricket nation were afraid when he used to come to bat we're definitely talking about some cricketer right some names pop in your head so tiger is trying to attract all of those meanings and store inside and this process continues and continues and continues right so the idea here is let me play all this the idea here is that each word looks at the word before it and tries and modifies its own meaning and all of that happens because of the K Q and V and how they interact with each other. K, Q and V are made from a vector. So when a word goes inside a transformer, the first thing happens is that It becomes three forms of itself. one becomes key, one becomes query and one becomes value, right?
The Admin: that is happening and then the keys of all words tries to match with queries of all words and then modify the value that's algorithm but we're going to go deeper into that part in the next session today I'm just going to explain what goes inside a transformer it immediately same word becomes a key of query or value right three different things now this concept of why a word becomes three different things to find relevance with somebody else is slightly confusing and that is why I built this particular
The Admin: here again a very very simple algorithm where what we are trying to do dict B. B is trying to predict C. C is trying to predict A. That's the data set that we have and we have three things here. We are three four ways of looking at it. We have separated the K, Q and V. We are saying that KQV are different as they are in the actual algorithm. All the option is that K and Q and V are exactly same. We don't modify the word that is going in. So when a word let's say goes to the model what is the first thing that happens? First of all it gets converted into ID. So 1 9 643. Then we look at the embedding table which has those 8,000 vectors. From there that vector is picked up. That vector is placed here. Right? And let's say the cat sat on the mat. This is the we're talking about. So 0 1 2 3.
02:50:00
The Admin: We need to find the position embedding for this and literally add them. So 8,96 additions, right? So now we have the added vector normalization happens but I'm going to talk about that later on that goes inside the model. The first thing that happens to any token is splits itself or becomes three different kind of tokens internally. is called value. Be clear on this part. Again, next session we're going to go deeper on what KQE are. But this is the first thing that happened. This is the attention mechanism. So the cat sat on the mat. Each one of them become 1 2 3 or KQV. All of them become KQV. So you can say KC QC VC and then K S QS and VS and so on. Right? Every word becomes three different things internally. Key, query and value.
The Admin: When for example I'm only going to write key here. When this guy becomes three this guy's key tries to talk to all the cues of all the other words including itself to find its own importance not the actual token. This question has bothered me a lot. Why we don't have the cat sat on the right? Why this word is not directly talking to all the words? Why the words have to change themselves into a query and I have to convert myself into a key and then I talk to them right this is what happens why can't I directly talk to each word that's topic we're discussing so KQE happens so one way to prove that this is required is to say that that doesn't happen so if that doesn't happen that means basically equal to V right
The Admin: and other is is not equal to V. That is what I've written here in this setup. The last experiment we're looking at the KQV are not same. separate K, Q and V. Then we say KQV are Each word directly talks to other words not there some other representation. Here we are saying let's make K and Q same but the V is separate. And then here we say K Q and V are same and K is separate. And let's start training. What do you think will happen? let me restart it at a higher speed.
The Admin: big difference. For some reason, the Q and the V need to be separate, which means every token that goes inside a transform block needs to become a key, needs to become a query and needs to become a value. And these three needs to become different. They become different because of a neural network that comes in between. We are going to talk about that also. So that's the question that we're going to understand in the next session.
The Admin: Why KQ need to be separate? Why we have seen performance is there but we're going to see what KQE actually are. Why key query and value and it is such a I'll say historical mindset reason and disappointing thing that Google invented right transformers invented by Google. They come from the search background. So they use key query and value system which becomes a nightmare to explain but we'll attempt in the next session. Here's the last example of what we are looking at. This is the normalization. So if I go back here you'll see that we have the norm thing also. What is this norm thing doing? here we have two kind of normalizations. We have layer norm and RMS norm both are used. Let's look at layer norm first. Here we're looking at token activation vectors. We have 8 10 12 and 14. And we have token 2 as 3 1 5 9 and 20 21 22 and some numbers are there. Right?
02:55:00
The Admin: In the last session if you remember anytime we add two numbers we need to normalize them because sometimes the number become really big. So We want to normalize everything. So that is what we're trying to do here. So let us play the training. You're going to see that if you do not normalize the model will not The model values remain very very high. That's the problem that we have. If you go to RMS norm I've already calculated the value. So this is where it's going to end. So we start training here also. again going to see that the convergence happened.
The Admin: So a very good way of looking at this is going to be something like this. 1 + 1 is Going to say what a stupid question, But if you look at what happens in multiplication, we have let's say one number here and one number here. And I'm just going to write one one here. And we're going to write one one here. We add position embeddings to them. And some thing magical happens is all of them become 2, two and two. And they all become 2, two and two. Now let's Multiply right? So they become four and four. So focus on this number only. So 1 + 1 becomes two. It's going to be then multiplied with a similar number becomes four. Then again going to multiply becomes 16. 16 and then 16 and then so on and so on. The We don't want that. We want all the numbers to be between plus and minus one.
The Admin: always that makes a life very very easy. That's why you're going to see the normalization is nearly every time you add anything tell yourself that you have to normalize them to bring them down to keep the values within a particular range. That's where the normalization exists and that example is showing that okay so that's where the session ends today but remember that what your assignment is to make sure that you have a English Hindi Telu and your language in Indic. download those pages. you can use more data if you want but the fertility is going to be calculated on these pages only. Calculate the fertility of English after you make your tokenizer. Then you have Hindi, Telugu and the bad tokenizer fertility minus your best tokenizer fertility for language denominator thousand divide by that score. All the best because you may have to really think hard on how do we get this right.
The Admin: Suddenly all what I discussed ZWJ and so on will be super important and when you talk to your own by the way did you know that it's possible to write HA in three ways before today's session right okay all right so session ends if you want to just run away from me you can but I'm here for your questions They just came out.
Khemraj rathore: Yeah, this experiment of KQV which you shown. Can you please repeat? I mean I got confused.
The Admin: What were you confused about?
Khemraj rathore: I didn't understood what that experiment basically points us to and why we are actually doing this equal to and then separate thing. what are we trying to prove? So the point you are saying that it needs to be separate but what is that point we are trying to prove here?
The Admin: that they need to be separate.
Khemraj rathore: Yeah, I mean yeah that is true but what is that injection?
The Admin: There's no tuition. No, I didn't explain any intuition. I just said mathematically here's a proof. In the next session, I'll explain intuition. I specifically said that.
Khemraj rathore: Okay.
The Admin: What I'm trying to explain is whenever anyone looks at this algorithm, we have a K and Q and value. Why do we need to separate out these? So here using mathematics we proving that if it don't model doesn't train. So here's a ma math proof first. The next is going to be some intuition about it.
Khemraj rathore: So here when we say Q KV we are equal. So the token what we are currently present at its own KQV are equal right. Okay.
The Admin: We are equal. Yes. Okay.
Sachin Bharadwaj: Rohan, how do you converse to 131K vocab size? Let's say you fix the D model. that's for the computer related reasons and of course you have input and output weights. But why not let's say 120K 140? I mean what made you choose exactly that number?
The Admin: It's a good power of two.
The Admin: That's all.
Sachin Bharadwaj: But did you have a target of let's say a fertility rates across Indian languages that you were targeting when you're building a tokenizer and…
Sachin Bharadwaj: training it?
The Admin: Sorry. Yes.
Sachin Bharadwaj: I mean you have a target for fertility that you're targeting across Indian multiple languages when you're building a tokenizer.
03:00:00
The Admin: My target was to Okay, there are two ways of looking at it. First of all, this is two 17. So, perfect number for this is something that GPUs love. all the other tokenizer are exactly this or…
Sachin Bharadwaj: Okay.
The Admin: more or some power of two.
The Admin: So if I deviate from that number, I cannot say I'm better than somebody else. Third, I wanted to be better than all the indic tokenizer that are there while being really good at the coding and math part. So the moment I said these three, my strategy is going to be fixed.
Sachin Bharadwaj: All right. Thanks.
The Admin: Okay, Rajie.
Rajiv Seelam: Yeah. When will this session two will be visible on axium? Because last time session one was visible even before.
The Admin: Yeah, generally after the class. So around 10:30 sning trump and…
Rajiv Seelam: On 10th. Okay. Fine.
Sneha C: Rohan in tick token if I only give Trump it is showing two tokens but if Donald Trump again two tokens so the vocabulary will is Trump is a different thing and Donald Trump is a different thing.
The Admin: you're seeing space trump.
The Admin: So spacetum is one token.
Sneha C: If I give Trump with small T it is giving two. Okay. Okay.
The Admin: Yes, because that's a different word, right? Lion for example and…
Sneha C: So the case is also important. Okay.
The Admin: lion are different words. So spellings Very important. yes,…
Rishikesh Kumar: Yeah one so this QKV is for attention thing no so initially when we start training the model this QV will have some arbitrary data and…
The Admin: that's correct.
Rishikesh Kumar: as the back propagation will happen it will updated
The Admin: That's correct.
The Admin: Are they not?
Adinath Auti: Yeah, how do we decide the dimension of the embedding and does the vocabulary size have any influence on how big my embedding size is?
The Admin: Everything is linked. How do we decide the size of a tire of a car? Is it linked to the weight of the payload?
Adinath Auti: Yeah. Got it.
The Admin: So everything is linked. So you will want a big vocabulary only if your model is also big. because big vocabulary means a lot of context is going to be put in lot of information needs to be learned which the model needs to be The way a model becomes big is by I either adding number of layers or making the dimensions bigger.
The Admin: So everything is linked. That mean data also has to be higher.
Adinath Auti: And I had another doubt here. So in the last assignment we saw that similar concepts they are neighbors in the embedding space. So does that also hold true for different languages?
The Admin: That also works true for different languages. Yes. In fact, I'm not sure you're seeing This link specifically spoke about that the thing that you just asked for. This guy went in for different languages, same context,…
The Admin: different languages, different context, same languages and so on and actually proved that this happens for different languages.
Adinath Auti: All right,…
Adinath Auti: I check this out.
The Admin: All right.
The Admin: All right, if you don't have anything else to ask, then I will see you on next Saturday. I hope you learned something today, especially the sha thing. At least maybe you learned the sha and make something great like beat that score. I would love to see some one of you scoring a lakh 100,000 score because possible if you really put your head to it and you're allowed to look at a tokenizer, take those tokens from a very well-trained open air token,…
The Admin: everything is fine. try and beat the score because even if you're doing it for example if you're taking a big tokeniz and taking from there that also means that there's something to learn there
Rishikesh Kumar: Yeah Ron one last question.
Rishikesh Kumar: So this tokenizer you told that if we get new data set we have to start training from scratch. So it's kind of a blocker no means like u tokenizer every time we get new data set we have to start training a new model is there some correct yes correct But…
The Admin: No one second your question has an assumption that a new data set has tokens that cannot be represented by the old tokenizer. So first thing I do is to take the new data run my tokenizer on top of it look at a fertility if it is acceptable I don't have to train it that itself means that my model is not trained well on that right it has weights right it has weights attached and…
03:05:00
Rishikesh Kumar: if the fertility is high then we have to trail it. There is no way we can extend our tokenizer. No. Okay.
The Admin: if you extend tokenizer that means you're adding new weights which were never trained which are random so not possible okay
Rishikesh Kumar: Okay.
The Admin: So, yes,…
sonu agarwal: So how this part is particularly whatever was asked by Rishikes how it is working with the big LLM models where they have good amount of data and every time they're adding maybe new languages in term of language or encoding languages. So how this part is working there? I mean there's doing separate multiple and then combining the output of how they're doing it re like entire model.
The Admin: they have to train entire model. a lot of people were complaining on this. And anthropic also said indirectly. So 4.7 opus and 4.8
The Admin: Moment is a different tokenizer you have to train on it. Opus open. 8 uses more tokens to represent the same text for some reason at least in the coding side. Right. So here you can see one possible reason is the My usage open 4.7 4.8 consume more token on average than 4.6 partly to tokenizer changes.
The Admin: So every company does keep on improving and there 4.7 4. Not very old right. These are huge models. That's correct.
sonu agarwal: So it's not like on delta they are training I mean the transfer learning it's just from scratch there.
sonu agarwal: Okay. No.
The Admin: The Sunet 5 new tokenizer 401 41% more tokens per pound, right? So companies will want more tokens if you think about it. Anthropic and OpenAI will want you to use more token So their tokenizer split is a better idea for them, not for us as users. Raj
Raj H: Google translator. Can we use Google translator?
The Admin: Go ahead.
The Admin: Can he book a
Meeting ended after 03:07:32 👋
This editable transcript was computer generated and might contain errors. People can also change the text after it was created.

